A new years Gift, entitled, A plain Pathway
to perfect rest: Gathered out of sundry Godly Patriarchs, and Prophets, very comfortable
for all Christians, and most needful to be had in remembrance.
To the Right honourable Lord Rowland Hayward, Lord
Mayor of the City of London, your daily Orator
Edward Wollay, wishes lunge life, with in-
crease of Faith and Justice.
Israel ought to be commended by reason of Doctrine
and Wisdom, showing therefore, that they which
have it, should not only themselves be wise ther-
thorough, but should also serve others by teaching
and preaching: that is, that Masters & Parents
should instruct their family, and the Shepherd his sheep, to save
them from the Wolf: what strength is the sheep of to escape
the violence or force of the Wolf? none, saith Ecclesiast. but even
by his Shepherd: Even so, the Minister & the Preacher, if they
be true Preachers & true teachers, surely then doth his Flock
increase: & when the Wolf Satan, which ever hath ben mans
Enemy shall come seeking if he may devour man, then by the
Doctrine of his Shepherd taught unto him, shall overcome
Satan his Enemy. Here is the Sheep saved by the force
of the Shepherd: God grant increase.

Eccle.ca.1
John.

Let us praise God for al his benefits which we have received:
Consent not unto sin. Geve Alms of thy Goods. Be mercy
full after thy power. Be always thankful unto God for his mer-
cifull benefits given unto thee: use them well, for thou art but a
Steward. God grant that we may so bestow our time in this
world, that in the world to come we may be found good Ste-
wards and have life everlasting. Amen.

Tobi.4.

O, that men were not so much lovers of themselves. Be not
overcome with Coveitousnes: Be not Boasters of yourselves:
but remember who doth geve the increase. Be not proud, nor
cursed speakers: Be not disobedient to Father & mother. Be not
unthanckful nor ungodly. Be not unkind, nor Trusebreakers.
Be not false Accusers, nor Riotous Persons.

Timo.4.
Acts.26.

Be not fierce Despisers of them which are good, or do good:
but always lay to thy helping hand, encourage them to go for-
wards in their good deeds, and if thou se them step back, go
thou forwards in their place: that is the good servant, incou-
raging the rest to seek their masters commodity so much as
in them doth lie, dealing truly with all men, then be you well as-
sured to win the crown of everlasting glory, world without
end.

David.9.

     All is but vanity saith the Preacher, why be you then so heady
and hie minded, greedy upon voluptuousness more then the lo
verse of God, having a similitude of godliness, but have denied
the power thereof, and such you abhor. The servant of the
Lord must not strive, but apt to teach, be gentile unto al men,
and one that can suffer wrong with meekness: nay wee can
not do so, why? because wee are men of corrupt minds: but it
shall not lunge prevail, the evil men and deceivers shall wax
worse and worse: while they deceive, they shall be deceived them-
selves: therefore let every man that calls on the name of Christ
fly from iniquity. Great are thy Judgements (O Lord) ther-
fore men do err that will not be reformed with thy wisdom,
God grant wee may be reformed by him.

Eccle.12.
Peter.12.
Judges.1.

     If thou harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God: blessed
shalt thou be, but if thou know my commandments, saith
the Lord, and keep them not, cursed shalt thou be, yea cursed
shall be the fruit of thy store: though wee have sinned saith
Daniell yet if wee call to God in time, he will geve us time to re-
pent, to know the truth: and that wee may come to ourselves a-
gain, to avoid the snare of the Devil, which wee are holden
captive of him: and nothing is able to unloose us saith Timothy
but a sure faith fixed on Jesus Christ, and through his precious
Blood shedyng, wee are all saved from death, and shall come by
him to life everlasting. God grant for his son Jesus Christ
sake that after this life we may com to life everlasting. Amen.

Deuteronomy.28.
Lev.26.
Barn.1.
Dani.9.
Timo.2.
Gallant.6.

     TO those which writers be, and perfect verses make,
Leave of your trifling toys, and, such doings undertake,
As shall both profit, and, bring gain to Common wealth,
Then shall the writers win the praise and Readers shall gain health,
To read that which is good, it will their souls advance,
And writers knowledge knit with grace, may vanquish ignorance:
     You Readers mark this well, and Print this in your heart,
And do not as the Partridge doth, at every thing to start,
At every wind that blows, it runs in woods to lie,
And every Child that throws a stone, doth make the Partridge fly,
Now as I trust you will, plant this within your breast,
     It shall encourage me to write the way to perfect rest.

When I did call to mind, what cures wee have in care,
This one chief clause I find, most mindful to beware,
Wee know what God hath wild to do, or to forbear:
Yet willingly wee yield, from safety unto snare,
And therefore in this case, my judgement doth advance,
     That knowledge without grace, is worse then Ignorance.
Wee know what thanks wee owe, to God for all his gifts,
Yet contrary we show to him, ourselves unthrifts,
The good from evil we see, in all our daily drifts,
Yet to do good we flee, for lack of graces gifts,
Then may we use this froze, most nice in remembrance,
     That knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.

Now know wee Scripture plain, whereas before we did not,
Yet are wee much more vain, then when the same we read not,
Wee run forth headlong so, as God or man wee dread not,
Which soon will plant our woe, if God the same forbed not,
While wee know no right race, wee run under obeisance,
     Our knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.
We know wee ought to love, although wee be not loved,
Again no wrong to move, though wrong to us be moved,
Although wee be reproved, we ought not to reprove,
These godly words approved, doth show for our behove,
Yet wanting grace, wee chase away Gods ordinance,
     This knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.

Wee know wee should forgeve, as wee would be forgiven,
Yet styll in ire wee live, as though our hearts were reeven,
Revengements we do keep, for light occasions given,
Our Neighbours grief we seek, both every Morn and Even,
The more wee spy in space, the less yet our entrance,
     Our knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance,
All falsehood and deceit, wee should also abhor,
Yet use wee more that slight, than ever wee did before
Lingering still to view, to hurt our Neighbour sore,
So wee may them pursue, wee care not for no more
Repression bears the Mace, and Lucre leads the Dance,
     Their knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance,

Wee know that wee should work the works of righteousness,
Yet lie wee still and lurk in sloth and idleness,
Wee should eschew the dark, and to the light address,
Yet do wee as the Turk, all godly light express,
In steed of works wee place, our lust and dalliance,
     Thus knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.
Eche man account must make, as he hath hear vocation,
His Talent not to slake, but turn to augmentacion,
This must wee do I say, in pain of our dampnacion,
Then croak no more I pray, of our justificacion,
Wee think to know the pace, discharges our allegiance,
     This knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.

Better to sit even still, then for to rise and fall,
So is it much less ill, to know nothing at all,
Then for to have great skill, and then live worst of all,
Fulfilling not Gods will, as he hath wild wee shall,
Thus ignorance may face, our knowledge no entrance,
     For knowledge without grace, is worse then ignorance.
Which grace that wee now lack, for want of calling for,
Pray wee the Lord to grant, to salve this foresaid sore,
That in us he may put, repentance in such store,
God grant us out to shut, all our wilful error,
All Virtue eke embrace, and Vice away to glance,
     That knowledge knit with grace, may vanquish ignorance.

Lo this much I write plain, to show which way is best,
     then follow this and do not fine, then shall you joy and rest,
With God which sits above, with Angels round about,
     knock and I will open, (saith he) of this have thou no doubt,
Great compfort sure is this, then let us cal and pray,
     for our good Queen and her Counsel, to save them from decay.

