he Sinners Redemption.
Wherein is described the blessed Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, toga
there with his life on earth, and his precious death on the Cross for
Mankind.
To the tune of, The bleeding heart. Or, In Create, etc.
ALL you that are to mirth inclined,
Consider well, and bear in mind,
What our good God hath for us done,
In sending his beloved Son,
     For to redeem our souls from thrall,
     This was the Saviour of us all.

Let all our songs of praises be
Unto his heavenly Majesty,
And evermore amongst your mirth,
Remember Christ our Saviours birth

The five and twentieth of December,
Good cause have we for to remember,
In Bethelem upon that morn,
There was our blessed Mossies borne.

The night before that happy tide,
The spotless Virgin and her Guide,
Went long time seeking up and down
To find their lodging in the town.

But mark how all things came to pass
The Inns and lodgings so filled was,
That they could have no room at all,
But in a silly Ox his stall.

This night the Virgin Mary mild,
Was safe delivered of a Child,
According unto heavens decree,
Mans sweet salvation for to be.

Near Bethelem did Shepherds keep,

Their herds and flocks of feeding sheep
To them Gods Angels did appear,
Which put the shepherds in great fear

Prepare and go the Angel said,
To Bethelem, be not afraid,
There shall you find this blessed morn
The Princely Babe sweet Jesus born.
With thankful heart and joyful mind,
The shepherds went the Babe to find,
And as the heavenly Angel told,
They did our Saviour Christ behold.

Within a manger was he laid,
The Virgin Mary by him staid,
Attending on the Lord of life,
Being both Mother, Maid, and Wife.

Three Eastern Wise men from afar,
Directed by a glorious star,
Came boldly on and made no stay,
Until they came where Jesus lay.

And being come into the place,
Whereas the blessed Mossies was,
They humbly laid before his feet,
Their gifts of gold and odours sweet

See how the Lord of heaven and earth,
Showed himself lowly in his birth.
A sweet example for Mankind
To learn to bear an humble mind.

The second part, To the same tune.
NO costly robes nor rich attire,
Did Jesus Christ our Lord desire,
No music nor sweet harmony,
Till glorious Angels from on hie,

Did in melodious manner sing
Praises unto our heavenly King,
All Honour, Glory, Might and Power,
Be unto Christ for evermore.

If queers of Angels did rejoice,
Well may Mankind with heart & voice
Sing praises to the God of Heaven,
That unto us his Son hath given.

Moreover let us every one,
Call unto mind and think upon
His righteous life, and how hee did
To have poor sinners justifid.

Suppose O man that thou should lieIn prison strong condemned to die,
And that no friend upon the earth,
Could ransom thee from cruel death:

Except thou can some party find,
That for thy sake will be so kind,
His own hearts blood for to dispense,
And lose his life in thy defence:
Such was the love of Christ when we
Were lost to hell perpetually,
To save us from the gulf of woe,
Himself much pains did undergo.

While in this world he did remain,
He never spent an hour in vain,
In fasting and in prayer divine,
He daily spent away his time.

He in their Temples daily taught,
And many wonders strange he wrought:He gave the blind their perfect sight,
And made the lame to go upright.

He curd the Lepers of their evils,
And by his power he cast out devils,
He raised Lazarus from the grave,
And to the sick their health he gave.

But yet for all these wonders wrought:The Jews his dear destruction sought
The traitor Judas was the man,That with a kiss betrayed him than.

Then was he led to judgment hall,
Like one despised amongst them all,
And had the sentence given, that he
Should suffer death upon a tree.

Unto his execution place,
They brought him on with much disgrace,
With vile reproachful taunts & scorns
They crowned him with a wreath of thorns.

Then to the cross through hands & feet,
They nayld our blessed Redeemer sweet,
And further to augment his smart.
With bloody spear they pierced his heart

Thus have you seen and heard aright,
The love of Christ, the Lord of Might,
And how he shed his preciorus blood,
Only to doe us sinners good:
     And to redeem our souls from thrall,
     This was the Saviour of us all.
