A New-yeeres-gift for the Pope.
Come see the difference plainly decided, between Truth and Falsehood
Not all the Popes Trinkets, which here are brought forth,
Can balance the Bible for weight, and true worth:
Your Bells, Beads and Crosses, you see will not do it,
Or pull down your Scale, with the Devil to boot.
To the Tune of, Thomas, you cannot, etc.


ALl you that desirous are to behold
     the difference twixt falsehood and faith,
Mark well this Emblem, one piece of pure gold,
     a Cart-load of false Coin outwayeth,
Then wisely consider and bear in your mind,
Though Sedans Instruments true faith to blind,
A thousand devises daily doe find;
     Yet all is in vain, they cannot, they cannot,
     Yet all is in vain they cannot.

The [diff]erence twixt Papist and Protestant here,
     yo[u'l] [ha]ve in a moment debated,
The [one] loves the Gospel that shines still clear,
     the other is more subtile-pated,
He will not be ruled by the Scriptures large scope,
But trusts in Traditions derived from the Pope,
By which to be saved he doth constantly hope:
     Fond fools y' are deceived, you cannot, etc.

True Justice, against whom no falsehood prevails,
     the case for both Parties decides
[And] here she doth hold up her unpartial Scales;
     no fictions nor lies she abides:
The Pope like a Martialist hardy and stout,
[Co]mes marching in pomp with all his brave rout,
[To] win by his multitude he makes no doubt:
     but alas father Pope you cannot, etc.

Thus are these two opposites come to the place,
     where truth must be proved by trial,
The Pope thinks with greatness to carry the grace,
     but Justice hath eyes to descry all:
The Scales are made even, the Bible's in one,
Which is the true means of Salvation alone,
They striving to pass it, doe strive till they groan;
     Yet all is in vain, they cannot, etc.

The Pope feeling he must be tried by the Bible,
     did seek to overcome it by might,
He tried by all means that for him was possible;
     but all he could bring was too light:
Their Masses and Dirges, with such superstitions,
Decrees and Decretals, with other Traditions,
The golden Legend with late new additions:
     Yet all is in vain, they cannot, etc.

Thus still the pure Gospel against falsehood prevails,
     which when the proud Prelate did see,
A Cart-load of Trinkets he puts in the Scales,
     and thrust it as full as might be,
With great wooden Crosses and many great babies,
The Pictures and Saints of a bevy of Ladies,
Who daily are worshipped by these grand Rabbis:
     Yet still father Pope you cannot, etc.
Yet still father Pope [you cannot, etc.]

