I Rauff Shelton mercer of London and at this time apprentice with Thomas Keyle mercer of the same City being the vii day of March Anno xvc xxij in goods whole and perfect Remembrance commend my soul into the hands of the merciful and indivisible trinity, the father, the son and the holigost [Holy Ghost] three persons in one very god and to the protection of the Immaculate and most beautiful virgin Mary heartily beseeching her to be my protector from the horrible fiend at the separating of my soul from my body and desiring heartily that it may please her to be as a mediatrix mediator for my soul to the high majesty of god for mercy & grace. And also I commend it to the Custody & petitions of all the holy company of heaven that they will vouchsafe to pray to god for Remission forgiveness of mine offences that I may by the mercy & will of god and by mediation of our Lady and by their intercessions be partaker of everlasting bliss. Also I will and bequeath my body to be buried in Saint Thomas of Acres Church in my father’s vault and there I will & charge mine Executors to make a tomb like unto master ylams tomb next adjoining. And at Master Wells altar I will and charge my executors as they will answer to almighty god at the day of Judgement to find an honest priest of good fame & name to sing mass at the said alter daily except a lawful cause of the priest found to the contrary during the space of ten years following and to begin at this day of my burying paying & giving every year to the priest £7. And he be bound to pray for my soul, my fader [father] and moder mother souls my friends soul & all christen Christian souls [souls]. Also I will and charge my Executors to lay & set a plate of the figure of a woman upon my mother’s tomb in pardon Church yard with a scripture under willing people passing by to pray for the soul of her husband’s soul and all her children and good friends souls and all Christian souls. Also I bequeath to my Sister Mary Shelton nun at sent Ellin [Probably St Helen’s, Bishopsgate, a Benedictine order £10. Also I bequeath to Thomas Roberts and his wife £10. Also I bequeath to Saint Thomas [presumably St Thomas Acres church] 20 shillings. Also I bequeath to chelcey Church the church at Chelsea, at this time, a village separate from London 20 shillings. And I will my said master Thomas Keyle and Richard Rawlyns be mine Executors per by me, Raf Shelton