I. To my worshipful husband, William Pas ton, 
be this letter taken. 

(About 1440) 

Dear husband, I recommend me to you, etc. 
Blessed be God I send you good tidings of the coming 
and the bringing home of the gentlewoman that ye 
weeten of from Reedham this same night, according 
to appointment that ye made there for yourself. 

And as for the first acquaintance between John 
Paston and the said gentlewoman, she made him 
gentle cheer in gentle wise, and said he was verily 
your son ; and so I hope there shall need no great 
treaty between them. 

The parson of Stockton told me if ye would buy 
her a gown, her mother would give thereto a goodly 
fur. The gown needeth to be had; and of colour it 
would be a goodly blue, or else a bright sanguine. 

I pray you to buy for me two pipes of gold. Your 
stews do well. The Holy Trinity have you in govern- 
ance. Written at Paston in haste the Wednesday 
next after " Deus qui errantibus " for default of a 
good secretary etc. 

Yours, 

Agnes Paston. 
p. ii. 1 



2 A PILGRIMAGE TO WALSINGHAM 

II. To my right worshipful husband, John Paston, 
dwelling in the Inner Temple at London, in 
haste. 

(1443) 

Right Worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
j'ou, desiring heartily to hear of your welfare, thanking 
God for your amending of the great disease that ye 
have had ; and 1 thank you for the letter that ye sent 
me, for by my troth my mother and I were nought in 
heart's ease from the time that we wist of your sick- 
ness, till we wist verily of your amending. My mother 
behested another image of wax of the weight of you, 
to our Lady of Walsingham, and she sent four nobles 
to the four orders of friars at Norwich to pray for you, 
' and I have behested to go on a pilgrimage to Walsing- 
ham and to St Leonard's for you ; by my troth I had 
never so heavy a season as I had from the time that I 
wist of your sickness, till I wist of your amending, and 
yet my heart is in no great ease nor shall be, till I 
weet that ye be very whole. Your father and mine 
was this day sev'night at Beccles, for a matter of the 
Prior of Bromholm, and he lay at Gelderstone that 
night, and was there till it was nine of the clock and 
the other day. And I sent thither for a gown, and 
my mother said that I should none have then till I 
had been there anon, and so they could none get. 

My father Garneys sent me word that he should 
have been here the next week and my emme also, and 
play them here with their hawks, and they should 
have me home with them, and so God help me, I shall 
excuse myself from going thither if I may, for I 
suppose that I shall more readily have tidings from 
you here than I should have there. I shall send my 
mother a token that she took me, for I suppose the 
time is come that I should send it her, if I keep the 
behest that I have made; I suppose I have told you 
what it was. I pray you heartily that ye will vouchsafe 
to send me a letter as hastily as ye may, if writing be 
none disease to you, and that ye will vouchsafe to 



AGNES PASTON TO HER SON JOHN 3 

send me word how your sore do. If I might have had 
my will, 1 should have seen you ere this time; I would 
ye were at home, if it were your ease, and your sore 
mii^ht be as well looked to here as it is there ye be 
now, lever than a gown, though it were of scarlet. I 
pray you if your sore be whole so that ye may endure 
to ride when my father comes to London, that ye will 
ask leave and come home when the horse should be 
sent home again, for I hope ye shall be kept as ten- 
derly here as ye be at London. I may none leisure 
have to do write half a quarter so much as I should 
say to you if I might speak with you. I shall send you 
another letter as hastily as I may. I thank you that 
ye would vouchsafe to remember my girdle, and that 
ye would write to me at the time, for I suppose that 
writing was none ease to you. Almighty God have 
you in his keeping, and send you health. Written at 
Oxnead, in right great haste, on St Michael's even. 

Yours, 

M Paston. 

My mother greet you well, and sendeth you God's 
blessing and hers ; and she prayeth you, and I pray 
you also, that ye be well dieted of meat and drink, for « 
that is the greatest help that ye may have now to your 
healthward. Your son fareth well, blessed be God. 



in. To my ivell-heJoved son, John Paston, 

be this delivered in liaste. 

(About 1444) 

Son, I greet you well, and let you weet that foras- 
much as your brother Clement letteth me weet that 
ye desire faithfully my blessing; that blessing that I 
prayed your father to give you the last day that ever 
he spake, and the blessing of all saints under heaven, 
and mine mote come to you all days and times ; and 
think verily none other but that ye have it, and shall 
have it, with that that 1 find you kind and willing to 

1—2 



4 DISPUTE ABOUT LAND 

the weal of your father's soul, and to the welfare of 
your brethren. By my counsel, dispose yourself as 
much as ye may to have less to do in the world : your 
father said, " In little business lieth much rest." This 
world is but a thoroui»hfare, and full of woe, and when 
, we depart therefrom, right nought bear with us, but our 
good deeds and ill. And there knoweth no man how 
soon God will clepe him, and therefore it is good for 
every creature to be ready. Whom God visiteth, him 
he loveth. 

And as for your brethren they will I know certainly 
labour all that in them lyeth for you. Our Lord have 
you in his blessed keeping, body and soul. Written 
at Norwich, the 29th day of October. 

By your mother, 

Agnes Paston. 



IV, To John Paston, dwelling in the Temple 
at London, he this letter delivered in haste, 

(About 1444) 

I greet you well, and let you weet, that on the 
Sunday before St Edmund, after evensong, Agnes 
Ball came to me to my closet and bade me good even, 
and Clement Spicer with her; and I asked him what 
he would. And he asked me why I had stopped in the 
king's way ; and I said to him I stopped no way but 
^ mine own, and asked him why he had sold my land to 
JohnBall and he swore he was never accorded with your 
father, and I told him if his father had done as he did, 
he would have been ashamed to have said as he said ; 
and all that time Waryn Herman leaned over the 
park close and listened to what we said, and said that 
the change was a rewly change, for the town was undo 
thereby, and is the worse by a hundred pounds. And 
1 told him It was no courtesy to meddle him in a matter 
but if he were called to council ; and proudly going forth 
with me in the church, he said the stopping of the 



MORE LANDHOLDER'S TROUBLES 5 

way should cost me twenty nobles and yet it should 
be down again. And I let him weet, he that put it 
down should pay therefore. 

Also he said that it was well done that I set men 
to work to owl many while I was here, but in the end 
I shall lose my cost. Then he asked me why I had 
(taken) away his hay at Walsham, saying to me he 
would he had wist it, when it was carried, and he 
should a letted it ; and I told him it was mine own 
ground, and for mine own I would hold it; and 
he bade me take four acres and go no further, and 
thus churtly he departed from me in the churchyard ; 
and since I spake with a certain man, and asked him 
if he heard ought say why the dinner was made at 
Norfolk's house, and he told me (he) heard say that 
certain men had sent to London to get a commission 
out of the Chancery to put down again the wall and 
the dyke. 

I received your letter by Robert Repps this day, 
after this letter (was) written thus far. I have read 
it, but I can give you none answer more than I have 
written, save the wife of Harman hath the name of our 
Lady, whose blessing ye have and mine. Written at 
Paston, on the day after St Edmond. 

By your mother, 

Agnes Paston. 



V. To Edmund Paston of Clifford's Inn in 
London, be this letter taken. 

(1444) 

To mine well-beloved son. I greet you well, and 
advise you to think once of the day of your father's 
counsel to learn the law, for he said many times that 
whosoever should dwell at Paston, should have need 
to con defend himself. 

The Vicar of Paston and your father in Lent last 
was, were thorough and accorded, and doles set how 



6 TIMBER FOR BUILDING AT PASTON 

broad the way should be, and now he hath pulled up 
the doles and saith he will make a ditch from the 
corner of his wall, right over the way to the new ditch 
of the great close. And there is a man in Trunch 
hight Palmer too, that had of your father certain lands 
in Trunch over seven years or eight years agone, for 
corn, and truly hath paid all the years; and now he 
hath suffered the corn to be withset for eight shillings 
of rent to Gimmingham, which your father paid never. 
Geoffry asked Palmer why the rent was not asked in 
mine husband's time and Palmer said, for he was a 
great man, and a wise man of the law, and that was 
the cause men would not ask him the rent. 

I send you the names of the men, that cast down 
the pit that was (in) Genney's Close, written in a bill 
closed in this letter. 

I send you not tliis letter to make you weary of 
Paston, for I live in hope, and ye will learn that they 
shall be made weary of their work, for in good faith 
I dare well say it was your father's last will to have 
done right well to that place, and that can I shew of 
good proof though men would say nay. God make 
you right a good man, and send God's blessing and 
mine. Written in haste at Norwich, the Thursday 
after Candlemas day. 

Weet of your brother John how many joists will 
serve the parlour and the Chapel at Paston and what 
length they must be, and what breadth and thickness 
they must be, for your father's will was, as I ween 
verily, that they should be nine inches one way, and 
seven another way, and purvey therefore that they 
may be squared there, and sent hither, for here can 
none such be had in this country ; and say to your 
brother John it were well done to think on Stansted 
Church ; and I pray you to send me tidings from beyond 
sea, for here they are afraid to tell such as be reported. 

By your mother, 

Agnes Paston. 



AFFAIRS AT CAISTER 



VI. To my trusty and xvell-beloved friend. Sir 
TJioinas Hoxoys, parson of Castlecomh. 

(1450) 

Trusty and well-beloved friend, I greet you well.... 
And I pray you send me word who dare be so hardy 
to kick against you in my right. And say (to) them 
on my half that they shall be quyt as far as law and 
reason will. And if they will not dread nor obey that, 
then they shall be quyt by Blackbeard or Whitebeard, 
is to say by God or the Devil. And therefore I charge 
you send me word whether such as have been mine 
adversaries before this time continue still in their 
wilfulness etc. 

Item, I hear ofttimes many strange reports of the 
demenys of the governance of my place at Caister, 
and other places, as in my chatell approving, in my 
wines, the keeping of my wardrobe and clothes, the 
avail of my conies at Hellesdon etc. and approvement 
of my lands ; praying you heartily as my full trust is 
in you to help reform it, and that ye suffer no vicious 
man at my place of Caister abide, but well governed 
and diligent, as ye will answer to it. 

Almighty God keep you. Written at London, the 
27th day of May, in the 28th year of the reign of 
King Henry VI. 

John Fasxolf, Knight. 



8 HOME NEWS FROM MARGARET PASTON 

VII. To my right xvorshipfiil Jiu stand, John 

Pastofi, be this delivered in haste. 

{1451) 

V 't- •!* 'p 'I* 'T^ ^ -i^ 

I was at Topp's at dinner on Saint Peter's day, there 
my Lady Felbrigg and other gentlewomen desired to 
have had you there ; they said they should all have 
been the merrier if you had been there. My cousin 
Topps hath much care till she hears good tidings of her 
brother's matter ; she told me that they should keep a 
day on Monday next coming betwixt her brother and 
Sir Andrew Hugard and Wyndham. I pray you send 
me word how they speed and how ye speed in your 
own matters also. 

Also I pray you heartily that ye will send me a pot 
of treacle in haste, for I have been right evil at ease, 
and your daughter both, since that ye yeden hence, 
and one of the tallest young men of this parish lieth 
sick, and hath a great myrr, how he shall do, God 
knoweth. 

I have sent my uncle Berney the pot with treacle 
that ye did buy for him; mine aunt recommendeth her 
to you and prayeth you to do for her as the bill 
maketh mention of, that I send you with this letter, 
and as ye think best to do therein. Sir Harry Inglose 
is passed to God this night, whose soul God assoil ; 
and was carried forth this day at nine of the clock to 
Saint Faith's and there shall be buried. 

If ye desire to buy any of his stuff, I pray you 
send me word thereof in haste, and I shall speak to 
Robert Inglos, and to Wichingham thereof; I suppose 
they be executors. 

The blessed Trinity have you in his keeping. 
Written at Norwich in haste on the Thursday next 
after Saint Peter. 

I pray you trust not to the sheriff for no fair 
language. 

Yours, 

Margaret Paston. 



MARGARKT OF ANJOU VISITS NORWICH 9 

VIII. To my right worshipful master, John 
Paston, be this delivered in haste. 

(145^-) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, praying you to weet etc — 

As for tidings, the Queen came into this town on 
Tuesday last past after noon, and abode here till it 
was Thursday three after noon ; and she sent after my 
cousin Elizabeth Clere by Sharinborn to come to her, 
and she durst not disobey her commandment, and came 
to her; and when she came in the Queen's presence, 
the Queen made right much of her, and desired her to 
have an husband, the which ye shall know of here- 
after; but as for that, he is never nearer than he was 
before. The Queen was right well pleased with her 
answer and reported of her in the best wise and saith, 
by her troth, she saw no gentlewoman since she 
came into Norfolk that she liked better than she doth 
her. 

Blake, the bailey of Swaffham was here with the 
King's brother and he came to me, weening that 
ye had been at home; and said that the King's brother 
desired him that he should pray you in his name to 
come to him, for he would right fain that ye had come 
to him, if ye had been at home. And he told me, that 
he wist well that he should send for you, when he 
came to London, both for Cossey and other things. 

I pray you that ye will do your cost on me against 
Whitsuntide that I may have something for my neck. 
When the Queen was here, I borrowed my cousin 
Elizabeth Clere's device for 1 durst not for shame go 
with my beads among so many fresh gentlewomen as 
here were at that time. 

The blessed Trinity have you in his keeping. 
W^ritten at Norwich on the Friday next before Saint 
George. 

By yours, 

Margaret Pastcn. 



10 PURCHASES TO BE MADE 

IX. To my right xvorshipful Jiusbaiid, John 
Paston, be this delivered in haste. 

(1453) 

Right worshipful husband, I commend me to you, 
I pray you that ye will do buy two dozen trenchers, 
for I can none get in this town. Also I pray you that 
ye will send me a book with chardeqweyns that I may 
have of in the morning, for the air be not wholesome 
in this town, therefore I pray you heartily let John 
Suffield bring it home with him. 

No more, but the blessed Trinity have you in his 
keeping and send you good speed in all your matters. 
Written on St Leonard's even. 

My uncle Philip commends him to you, and he hath 
been so sick since I came to Reedham, that I wend 
he should never have escaped it, nor not is like to do, 
but if he have ready help, and therefore he shall into 
Suffolk this next week, to mine aunt, for there is a 
good physician, and he shall look to him. 

My Lady Hastyngs told me that Heydon hath 
spoken to Jeffrey Boleyn of London, and is agreed 
with him that he should bargain with Sir John 
Fastolf to buy the manor of Blickling, as it were 
for himself, and if Boleyn buy it, in truth Heydon 
shall have it. 

1 came to Norwich on Soulmass Day. 
Yours, 

Margaret Paston. 

X. To my xvell-beloved son, John Paston. 

(1453) 

Son, I greet you well, and send you God's blessing 
and mine, and let you weet that Robert Hill came 
homeward by Orwellbury, and Gurney telled him he, 
had been at London for money and could not speeden, 
and behested Robert that he should send me money 
by you. I pray you forget it not as ye come homeward, 
and speak sadly for another farmer. 

And as for tidings, Philip Berney is passed to God 



LENTEN PROVISION 11 

on Monday last past, with the greatest pain that ever 
1 saw man ; and on Tuesday Sir John Hevenini^ham 
yede to his church and heard three masses and came 
home again never merrier, and said to his wife that he 
would go say a little devotion in his garden, antl then he 
would dine, and forthv/ith he felt a fainting in his legs, 
and sydd down. This was at nine of the clock and he 
was dead ere noon. 

My cousin Clere prays you that ye let no man see 
her letter, which is ensealed under my seal. I pray 
you that ye will pay your brother William for four 
ounces and a half of silk, as he paid, which he sent me 
by William Taverner, and bring with you a quarter of 
an ounce even like of the same that I send you closed 
in this letter, and say your brother William, that his 
horse hath one farcy and great running sores in his 
legs. God have you in his keeping. Written at Nor- 
wich, on Saint Thomas's even, in great haste. 

By your mother, 

Agnes Paston. 

XI. To my right worshipful husband, John 
Paston, be this delivered in haste. 

(1454) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, beseeching you that ye be not displeased with i^ 
me, though my simpleness caused you for to be dis- 
pleased with me. By my troth it is not my will 
neither to do nor say that which should cause you for 
to be displeased, and if I have done (it), I am sorry 
thereof and will amend it ; whereof I beseech you to 
forgive me, and that ye bear none heaviness in your 
heart against me, for your displeasure should be too 
heavy to me to endure with. 

I send you the roll that ye sent for, ensealed by 
the bringer hereof ; it was found in your trussing 
coffer. As for herring, I have bought a horseload for 
AJ6d. I can get none eels yet; as for bever there 



12 ILL REPUTE OF THE ROAD TO LONDON 

is promised nie some, but I might not get it yet. 1 
sent to Joan Petclie to iiave an answer for the windows, 
for she might not come to me, and she sent me word 
that she had spoken thereof to Thomas Ingham, and 
he said that he should speak with you himself, and he 
should accord with you well enough, and he said to 
her it was not her part to desire of him to stop the 
lights; and also he said it was not his part to do it, 
because the place is his but for years. 

And as for all other errands that you have com- 
manded to be done, they shall be done as soon as they 
may be done. The blessed Trinity have you in his 
keeping. Written at Norwich, on the Monday next 
after Saint Edward. 

Yours, 

Margaret Paston. 

XII. To my right worshipful husband, John 
Paston, be this delivered in haste. 

(1455 or 1460) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me unto 
you. Pleaseth you to weet that mine Aunt Moundford 
hath desired me to write to you, beseeching you that 
ye will vouchsafe to chevise for her at London twenty 
marks for to be paid to Master Ponyngs, either on 
Saturday or Sunday, which shall be St Andrew's day, 
in discharging of them that be bounden to Master 
Ponyngs of the said twenty marks for the wardship 
of her daughter, the which twenty marks she hath de- 
livered to me in gold for you to have at your coming 
home, for she dare not adventure her money to be 
brought up to London for fear of robbing, for it is said 
here that there goeth many thieves betwixt this and 
London, which causeth her to beseech you to content 
the said money in discharging of the matter and of 
them that be bounden, for she would for no good that 
the day were broken. And she thanketh you heartily 
for the great labour and business that ye have had 
in that matter, and in all others touching her and hers, 



LIVERIES. ERRANDS OF AGNES PASTON 13 

wherefore she saith she is ever bound to be your 
beadswoman, and ever will be while she liveth. 

My cousin, her son, and his wife recommendeth 
them unto you, beseeching you that ye will vouchsafe 
to be their good master, as ye have aforetime; for 
they be informed that Daniel is come to Rising Castle, 
and his men make their boast that their master shall 
be again at Brayston within short time. 

Furthermore, as for the matter that my son wrote 
to me for the box whereon was written False Carte 
Sproute, that I should inquire of William Worcester 
where it were ; the said William was not at home since 
that I had his letter, but as soon as he cometh home I 
shall inquire of him, and send you an answer. 

As touching for your liveries, there can none be 
gotten here of that colour that ye would have of, 
neither murrey, nor blue, nor good russet, underneath 
3s. the yard at the lowest price, and yet is there not 
enough of one cloth and colour to serve you ; and as 
for to be purveyed in Suffolk, it will not be purveyed 
now against the time, without they had had warning 
at Michaelmas, as I am informed : and the blessed 
Trinity have j'ou in his keeping. Written at Norwich, 
on St Katherine's day. 

By your 

Margaret Paston. 

XIII. Errands to London of Agnes Paston, the 
28th day of January, 1457, the year of King 
Henry VI, the 36th. 

(1457) 
To pray Greenfield to send me faithfully word, by 
writing, how Clement Paston hath done his endeavour 
in learning. And if he hath not done well, nor will 
not amend, pray him that he will truly belash him, till 
he will amend, and so did the last master, and the best 
that ever he had at Cambridge. And say (to) Greenfield 
that if he will take upon him to bring him into good 
rule and learning, that 1 may verily know he doth his 



14 WARLIKE PREPARATIONS 

endeavour, I will give him ten marks for his labour, for 
I had lever he were fairly buried than lost for default 

Item, to see how many gowns Clement hath ; and 
they that be bare, let them be raised. He hath a short 
green gown, and a short musterdevelers gown, (which) 
were never raised, and a short blue gown that was 
raised, and made of a side gown, when I was last at 
London. And a side russet gown, furred with beaver, 
was made this time two years ; and a side murrey gown 
was made this time twelvemonth. 

Item, to do make me six spoons, of eight ounces of 
Troy weight, wellfashioned and double-gilt. 

And say (to) Elizabeth Paston, that she must use 
herself to work readily as other gentlewomen do, and 
somewhat to help herself therewithc 

Item, to pay the Lady Pole 26 shillings and 8d. for 
her board. 

And if Greenfield have done his devoir well to 
Clement, or will do his devoir, give him the noble. 

Agnes Paston. 

XIV. To my right worship/til husband, 
John Paston. 
(Before 1459) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, and pray you to get some crossbows and wyndacs 
to bind them with, and quarrels, for your houses here 
be so low that there may none man shoot out with no 
long bow, though we had never so much need. 

I suppose ye should have such things of Sir John 
Fastolf if ye would send to him ; and also I would ye 
should get two or three short poleaxes to keep with(in) 
doors, and as many jackets, and ye may. 

Partrich and his fellowship are sore afraid that ye 
would enter again upon them and they have made 
great ordinance within the house, and it is told me 
they have made bars to bar the doors crosswise, and 
they have made wickets on every quarter of the house 
to shoot out at, both with bows and with hand-guns; 



ALMONDS, SUGAR, AND FRIEZE 15 

and the holes that be made for hand-guns, they be 
scarce knee high from the plancher, and of such holes 
be made five, there can none man shoot out at them 
with no hand-bows. 

******** 

I pray you that ye will vouchsafe to do buy for me 
one pound of almonds and one pound of sugar, and 
that ye will do buy some frieze to make of your 
children's gowns; ye shall have best cheap and best 
choice of Hays's wife, as it is told me. And that ye 
will buy a yard of broad cloth of black for one hood 
for me of 44d. or four shillings a yard, for there is 
neither good cloth nor good frieze in this town. As 
for the children's gowns, and 1 have them 1 will do 
them maken. 

The Trinity have you in his keeping, and send you 
good speed in all your matters. 

Margaret Paston. 

XV. Unto my right worshipful cousin, Margaret 

Paston, this letter be delivered in haste. 

(1458) 

Right worshipful, and my most best beloved 
mistress and cousin, I recommend me unto you as 
lowly as I may, evermore desiring to hear of your 
good welfare, the which I beseech Almighty Jesu to 
preserve you, and keep you to his pleasure, and to your 
gracious heart's desire. 

And if it please you to hear of my welfare, I was in 
good hele at the making of this letter, blessed be God; 
praying you, that it please you for to send me word, if 
my father were at Norwich with you at this Trinity 
Mass or no, and how the matter doth between my 
mistress Blanch Witchingham and me, and if ye 
suppose that it shall be brought about or no, and how 
ye feel my father, if he be well willing thereto or no, 
praying you lowly that I may be recommended lowly 
unto my mistress, Arblaster's wife, and unto my 
mistress Blanch her daughter specially. 



16 SEA-FIGHT WITH SPANIARDS 

Right worshipful cousin, if it please you to hear of 
such tidings as we have here, the basset of Burgundy 
shall come to Calais the Saturday after Corpus Christi 
day, as men say five hundred horse of them. 

Moreover, on Trinity Sunday in the morning, came 
tidings unto my Lord of Warwick, that there were 28 
sail of Spaniards on the sea, and whereof there was 
sixteen great ships of forecastle ; and then my Lord 
went, and manned five ships of forecastle and three 
carvells and four spynnes; and on the Monday, in the 
morning after Trinity Sunday, we met together before 
Calais at four at the clock in the morning, and fought 
together till ten at the clock ; and there we took six of 
their ships, and they slew of our men about four score, 
and hurt a two hundred of us right sore, and there 
were slain on their part about a hundred and twenty, 
and hurt a five hundred of them. 

And happed me, at the first aboarding of us, we 
took a ship of three hundred ton, and I was left 
therein, and twenty three men with me ; and they 
fought so sore that our men were fam to leave them, 
and then come they and aboarded the ship that I was 
in, and there I was taken, and was prisoner with them 
six hours, and was delivered again for their men that 
were taken before ; and, as men say, there was not so 
great a battle upon the sea this forty winters ; and for- 
sooth we were well and truly beat, and my Lord hath 
sent for more ships, and like to fight together again in 
haste. 

No more I write unto you at this time, but that it 
please you for to recommend me unto my right 
reverend, and worshipful cousin your husband, and 
mine uncle Gournay, and to mine aunt his wife, and to 
all good masters and friends, where it shall please you; 
and after the writing I have from you, 1 shall be at you 
in all haste. 

Written on Corpus Christi day in great haste. 
By your own humble servant and cousin, 

John Jernyngan. 



A BED-CHAMBER AND ITS FURNITURE 17 

XVI. To my right worship/id husband, John Pastoii, 
be this delivered in haste. 

(Before 1459) 

Ri.^ht worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, desiring to hear of your welfare, praying you to 
weet that Sir Thomas Howes hath purveyed four 
dormants for the drawte chamber, and the malthouse 
and the brewery, whereof he hath brought three, and 
the fourth, that shall be the longest and greatest of 
all, he shall have from Heylesdon, which he saith my 
master Fastolf shall give me, because my chamber 
shall be made therewith. As for the laying of the 
said dormants, they shall be laid this next week 
because of the malthouse, and as for the remanent, 
I trow it shall abide till ye come home because I can 
neither be purveyed of posts, nor of boards not yet. 

I have taken the measure in the drawte chamber, 
there as ye would your coffers and your cowntewery 
should be set for the while, and there is no space 
beside the bed, though the bed were removed to the 
door, to set both your board and your cofTers there, 
and to have space to go and sit beside ; wherefore 
I have purveyed that ye shall have the same drawte 
chamber that ye had before, thereas ye shall lie to 
yourself ; and when your gear is removed out of your 
little house, the door shall be locked, and your bags 
laid in one of the great coffers, so that they shall be 
safe, I trust. 

Richard Charles and John Dow have fetched 
home the child from Rockland Tofts, and it is a pretty 
boy ; and it is told me that Will is at Blickling with 
a poor man of the town ; a young woman that was 
some time with Burton of this town sent me word 
thereof. I pray you send me w^ord if ye will that 
anything, that ye will, be done to him ere ye come 
home. Richard Charles sendeth you word that Willis 
hath been at him here, and offered him to make him 
estate in all things according to their indenture, and 
if he do the contrary ye shall soon have word. 

p. L. 2 



18 THE YEOMAN OF THE EWRY 

My mother prayeth you for to remember my sister, 
and to do your part faithfully ere ye come home, to 
help to get her a good marriage. It seemeth by my 
mother's language that she would never be so fain to 
have been delivered of her as she will now. 

It was told here that Knivet, the heir, is for to 
marry. Both his wife and child be dead, as it was 
told here ; wherefore she would that ye should enquire 
whether it be so or no, and what his livelihood is, and 
if ye think that it be for to do, to let him be spoken 
with thereof. 

I pray you that ye be not strange of writing of 
letters to me betwixt this and that ye come home, if 
I might, I would have every day one from you. The 
blessed Trinity have you in his keeping. Written at 
Norwich on the Tuesday next after the conversion of 
Saint Paul. 

By yours, 

Margaret Paston. 



XVII. To my right ■worshipful and right entirely 
■well-beloved cousin, the Viscount Beaumont. 

(Before 1460) 

Right worshipful and right entirely well-beloved 
cousin, I commend me to you with all my heart, 
desiring to hear and verily to know of your worshipful 
estate, profit, health and good prosperity, the which 
I beseech our Lord Jesu ever to maintain and preserve 
in all worship to his pleasance and to your heart's 
ease. 

Please it you, cousin, to weet, that your well- 
beloved servant Roger Hunt and a servant of my 
most dread Lord my husband, one William, yeoman 
of his ewry, have communed together, and been fully 
thorough and agreed that the said William shall have 
his office, if it may please your good Lordship, 

Wherefore, cousin, I pray you, as my special trust 
is in you, that ye will at the instance of my prayer 



MARGARET PASTON GIVES HER NEWS 19 

and writing, j^rant by jour lettcM-s patent to the said 
William the foresaid office with such waives and fees 
as Roger your said servant hath it of you, trusting 
verily that ye shall find the said William a faithful 
servant to you, and can and may do you right good 
service in that office. 

And, cousin, in the accomplishment of my desire 
in this matter, ye may do me a right good pleasure, 
as God knowcth, whom I beseech for his mercy to 
have you ever in his blessed governance, and send 
you good life and long with much good worship. 

Written at Framlingham the eighth day of March. 

Elianor, the Duchess of Norfolk. 

XVII I. To my riglit worshipful husband, John 
Paston, be this delivered in haste. 
(1460) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, praying you to weet that I have received your 
letter this day that ye sent me by Yelverton's man. 
As for your signet, I found it upon your board the 
same day that ye went hence and I send it you by 
Richard Heberd, bringer hereof. As for your errands 
that ye wrote to me for, Richard Charles is out about 
your errands about Gresham, and for his own matters 
also, and I suppose he cometh not home till it be 
Tuesday or Wednesday next coming, and as soon as 
he cometh home he shall go about your errands that 
ye wrote to me for. 

I sent you a letter written on Tuesday last past 
which as I suppose, Roger Ormsby delivered you. I 
took it to Alson Partridge ; she rode with Clippersby's 
wife to London. 

I pray you if ye have another son that ye will let 
it be named Harry, in remembrance of your brother 
Harry ; also I pray you that ye would send me dates 
and cinnamon as hastily as ye may. I have spoken 
with John Damme of that ye bade me say to him to 
say to Thomas Note, and he says he was well paid 



20 A SUGAR-LOAF AND A GIRDLE 

that ye said and thought therein as ye did. Nerles 
I bade him that he should say to the said Thomas 
therein as it were of himself without your advice or 
any others ; and he said he should so, and that it 
should be purveyed for this next week at the furthest. 
The blessed Trinity have you in his keeping. Written 
at Norwich in haste the Friday next before Candlemas 
Day. 

By your groaning wife, 

Margaret Paston. 

XIX. To my xvorshipful husband John Paston, 
be this delivered in haste. 
(About 1 461) 
Right worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you, desiring heartily to hear of your welfare, praying 
you that ye will send me word in haste how ye be 
agreed with Wichmgham and Inglos, for that matter 
that ye spake to me of at your departing, for if 
I should purvey either wood or hay, it should be 
bought best cheap betwixt this and Saint Margaret's 
mass, as it is told me. As for Appleyard, he come 
not yet to this town since he come from London. 
1 have sent to Sir Bryse to let me have knowledge 
when he cometh to town, and he hath promised that 
I shall have knowledge, and when he cometh I shall 
do your commandment. My mother bade me send 
you word that Waryn Herman hath daily fished her 
water all this year, and therefore she prayeth you to 
do therefore, while ye be at London, as ye think best. 

I pray you that ye will vouchsafe to send me 
another sugar-loaf, for my old is done, and also that 
ye will do make a girdle for your daughter for she 
hath need thereof. The blessed Trinity have you in 
his keeping. 

Written at Norwich in haste, on the Tuesday next 
before Saint Thomas's day. Paper is deynty. 
Yours, 

AL^RGARET Paston. 



MARRIAGE ARRANGEMENTS 21 



XX. To my right worshipful htcsband, John Paston, 
be this letter delivered in haste. 

(Between 1461 and 1465) 

Rit^ht worshipful husband, I recommend me to 
you ; please you to weet that I was at Norwich this 
week to purvey such thint^s as needeth me against 
this winter ; and I was at my mother's, and while 
I was there, there came in one Wrothe, a kinsman of 
Elizabeth Clere's and he sey your daughter and 
praised her to my mother, and said that she was a 
goodly young woman, and my mother prayed him to 
get for her ot>e good marriage if he knew any ; and 
he said he knew one should be of a 300 marks by 
year, the which is Sir John Cley's son, that is 
chamberlain with my lady of York, and he is of age 
eighteen years old. If ye think it be for to be spoken 
of, my mother thinks that it should be got for less 
money now in this world than it should be hereafter, 
either that one, or some other good marriage. 

Item, I spake with Master John Estgate for 
Pykering's matter after your intent of the matter 
of the letter that ye sent home, and he said to me he 
should write to you how he had done therein, and 
so he sent you a letter, the which was sent you 
by John Wodehouse's man with other letters. 

As for answer (of) other matters, Daubeney telleth 
me he wrote ^to you. I beseech Almighty God have 
you in his keeping. Written at Caister, the Sunday 
next after St. Martin. 

By your 

Margaret Paston. 



22 SOME DOGGEREL VERSE 

XXI. To my cousin, Margaret Paston. 

(Between 14(11 and 1465) 

Mine own dear sovereign lady, I recommend me 
to you, and thank j'ou of the great cheer that ye made 
me here to my great cost and charge and labour. No 
more at this time, but that I pray you ye will send me 
hither two ells of worsted for doublets, to happe me 
this cold winter, and that ye enquire where William 
Paston bought his tippet of fine worsted, which is 
almost like silk, and if that be much finer than that 
ye should buy me after seven or eight shillings, then 
buy me a quarter and the nail thereof for collars, 
though it be dearer than the other, for I would make 
my doublet all worsted for worship of Norfolk, rather 
than like Gonner's doublet. 



Item, I shall tell you a tale, 

Pampyng and I have picked your male 

And taken out pieces five, 

For upon trust of Calle's promise we may soon unthrive, 

And if Calle bring us hither twenty pound. 

Ye shall have your pieces again, good and round ; 

Or else, if he will not pay you the value of the pieces, there 

To the post do nail his ear, 

Or else do him some other wrongs, 

For I will no more in his default borrow, 

And but if the receiving of my livelihood be better plied 

He- shall Christ's hour and mine clean tried. 
And look ye be merry and take no thought, 

For this rhyme is cunningly wrought. 

My Lord Percy and all his house 

Recommend them to you, dog, cat, and mouse, - 

And wish ye had been here still, 

For they say ye are a good gill. 

No more to you at this time, 

But God him save that made this rhyme. 

Written the of Saint Mathe, 

By your true and trusty husband J. P. 



MARGARRT PASTON TO HER SON 23 

XXII. To my xvell-beloved ^on, Sir John Paston, 
be this delivered in haste. 

(Between 1463 and 1466) 

I greet you well, and send you God's blessing and 
mine, letting you weet that I have received a letter 
from you, the which ye delivered to Master Roger at 
Lynn, whereby I conceive that ye think ye did not 
well that ye departed hence without my knowledge, 
wherefore I let you weet 1 was right evil payd with 
you ; your father thought, and thinketh yet, that I 
was assented to your departing and that hath caused 
me to have great heaviness. I hope that he will be 
your good father hereafter if ye demean you well, and 
do as ye ought to do to him, and I charge you upon 
my blessing that in anything touching your father 
that should be (to) his worship, profit, or avail, that ye 
do your devoir and diligent labour to the furtherance 
therein as ye will have my good will, and that shall 
cause your father to be better father to you. 

It was told me ye sent him a letter to London; 
what the intent thereof was I wot not, but though he 
take it but lightly, I would ye should not spare to 
write to him again as lowly as ye can, beseeching him 
to be your good father ; and send him such tidings as 
be in the country there ye beeth and that ye ware of 
your expenses better and ye have been before this 
time, and be your own purse-bearer. I trow ye shall 
find it most profitable to you. 

I would ye should send me word how ye do, and 
how ye have shifted for yourself since ye departed 
hence, by some trusty man, and that your father 
have no knowledge thereof. I durst not let him know 
of the last letter that ye wrote to me, because he was 
so sore displeased with me at that time. 

Item, I would ye should speak with Wykes, and 
know his disposition to Jane Walsham, she hath said 
since he departed hence but she might have him she 
would never be married ; her heart is sore set on 
him ; she told me that he said to her that there was 



24 HARNESS, AND GEAR, AND HORSE 

no woman in the world he loved so well. I would 
not he should jape her, for she meaneth good faith, 
and if he will not have her, let me weet in haste, for I 
shall purvey for her in other wise. 

As for your harness and gear that ye left here, it 
is in Daubeney's keeping, it was never removed since 
your departing because that he had not the keys. I 
trow it shall apeyer but if it be taken heed at betimes ; 
your father knoweth not where it is. 

I sent your gray horse to Ruston to the farrier, 
and he saith he shall never be nought to ride neither 
right good to plough nor to cart ; he saith he was 
splayed and his shoulder rent from the body. I wot 
not what to do with him. 

Your grandam would fain hear some tidings from 
you; it were well done that ye sent a letter to her how 
ye do as hastily as ye may, and God have you in his 
keeping, and make you a good man, and give you grace 
to do well as I would ye should do. 

Written at Caister, the Tuesday next before Saint 
Edmund the King. 

Your mother, 

Margaret Paston. 

I would ye should make much of the parson of 
Filby, the bearer hereof and make him good cheer, if 
ye may. 

XXII I. To my mistress Margaret Paston, be this 
delivered in haste, at London. 

(1465) 

After all humble and most due recommendation, 
as lowly as I can, I beseech you of your blessing; 
please it you to wcet that 1 have sent to my father to 
have an answer of such matters as I have sent to him 
for in haste, of which matters the greatest of substance 
is for the manor of Cotton, beseeching you to re- 
member him of the same matter that I may have an 
answer in the most hasty wise. 

Also I pray you that mine aunt Poynings may be 



JOHN PASTON AND HIS HOSIER 25 

desired to send me an answer of such matters as she 
woteth of hy him that shall bring me an answer of the 
matter of Cotton. 

Also mother, I beseech you that there may be 
purveyed some mean that I might have sent me home 
by the same messenger two pair of hose, one pair 
black and another pair of russet, which be ready made 
for me at the hosier's with the crooked back, next to 
the Black Friar's gate within Ludgate; John Pampyng 
knoweth him well enough I suppose, and the black 
hose be paid for, he will send me the russet unpaid 
for: I beseech you that this gear be not forgotten, 
for I have not an whole hose for to don ; I trow they 
shall cost both pair 8s. 

My brother and my sister Anne, and all the 
garrison of Heylesdon fare well, blessed be God, and 
recommend them to you every one. 

I pray you visit the Rood of Northdoor and 
St. Saviour at Bermondsey, among while ye abide in 
London, and let my sister Margery go with you to 
pray to them that she may have a good husband ere 
she come home again ; and now I pray you send me 
some tidings as ye were wont to command me. And 
the Holy Trinity have you in keeping, and my fair 
mistress of the Fleet. Written at Norwich, on Holy 
Rood day. 

Your son and lowly servant, 

John Paston, the youngest. 

XXIV. To Mistress Margaret Paston, be 

this delivered. 

(Before 1466) 

Please it you to weet that I send you by Barker, 

the bearer hereof, three treacle pots of Geane as my 

apothecary sweareth unto me, and moreover that 

they were never undone since they came from Geane, 

whereof ye shall take as many as pleaseth you ; 

nevertheless my brother John sent to me for two, 

therefore I must beseech you that he may have at 



26 TIDINGS OF PEOPLE OF NOTE 

the least one ; there is one pot that is marked under 
the bottom two times with these letters — ^M.P., which 
pot I have best trust unto, and next him to the 
wryghe pot, and I mistrust most the pot that hath a 
krott above on the top, lest that he hath been undone. 
And also the other two pots be printed with the 
merchant's mark two times on the covering, and that 
other pot is but once marked but with one print, 
notwithstanding I had like oath and promise for one 
as well as for all. 

John Paston. 



XXV To master John Paston, or to my mistress his 
mother, be this letter delivered in haste. 

(1466) 

Brother I commend me to you. * * * By 
Juddy I sent you a letter by Corby within four days 
before this, and therewith tv/o pots of oil for salads, 
which oil. was as good as might be when I delivered 
it, and shall be good at the receiving, if it be not 
mishandled, nor miscarried. 

Item, as for tidings, the Earl of Northumberland is 
home into the North, and my Lord of Gloucester 
shall after as tomorrow, men say. Also this day 
Robert of Ratclyff wedded the Lady Dymock at my 
place in Fleet Street, and my lady and yours. Dame 
Elizabeth Bouchier, is wedded to the Lord Howard's 
son and heir. Also Sir Thomas Walgrave is dead, of 
the sickness that reigneth, on Tuesday, no cheer for 
you. Also my Lord Archbishop was brought to the 
Tower on Saturday at night, and on Monday at 
midnight he was conveyed to a ship, and so into the 
sea, and as yet I cannot understand whither he is 
sent, nor what is fallen of him. Men say that he 
hath offended, but as John Forter saith, some men 
say nay, but all his meny are disparbled, every man 
his way, and some that are great clerks, and famous 
doctors of his, go now again to Cambridge to school. 



ENTRY OF THE KING TO LONDON 27 

As for any other tidings I hear none. The 
Countess of Oxford is still in St. Martin's, I hear no 
word of her. 

The Oueen had child, a daughter, but late at 
Windsor, thereof I trow ye had word. And as for 
me, I am in like case as I was ; and as for my Lord 
Chamberlain, he is not yet come to town ; when he 
Cometh then shall I weet what to do. Sir John of 
Parr is your friend and mine, and I gave him a fair 
arming sword within this three days. I heard some- 
what by him of a back friend of yours, and you shall 
know more hereafter. 

Written the last day of April. 

[Written by Sir John Paston.] 



XXVL To Mistress Margaret Paston, be 
this delivered. 

(Probably between 1466 and 1469) 

Right worshipful mother, I commend me to you, 
and beseech you of your blessing and God's ; thank 
you for your tenderness and help both to me, my 
brother, and servants. 

The King is come to London, and there came with 
him, and rode again him, the Duke of Gloucester, 
the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of 
Northumberland, the Earl of Essex ; the Lords Harry 
and John of Buckingham, the Lord Dacre, the Lord 
Chamberlain, the Lord Montjoy and many other 
knights and esquires; the Mayor of London, twenty- 
two aldermen, in scarlet, and of the craftsmen of the 
town to the number of two hundred, all in blue. 

The King came through Cheap though it were out 
of his way, because (if he had not) he would not be 
seen ; and he was accompanied in all people with one 
thousand horse, some harnessed and some not. 



28 A BOY'S LIFE AT ETON 

My Lord Archbishop came with him from York, 
and is at the Moor, and my Lord of Oxford rode to 
have met the Kinjf, and he is with my Lord Archbishop 
at the Moor; and came not to town with the King. 
Some say, that they were yesterday three miles to 
the King wards from the Moor ; and that the King sent 
them a messenger, that they should come when that 
he sent for them. I wot not what to suppose therein. 

The King himself hath good language of the Lords 
of Clarence, of Warwick, and of my Lords of York 
and of Oxford, saying they be his best friends; but 
his household men have other language, so what 
shall hastily fall I cannot say. My Lord of Norfolk 
shall be here this night. I shall send you more when 
I know more. 

Item, if Ebesham come not home with my Uncle 
William, that then ye send me the two French 
books, that he should have written, that he may write 
them here. 

John Paston, Knight. 



XXVII. To Ill's xvorsJiipful brother, John Paston, 
be this delivered in haste. 

(1467-8) 

Right reverend and worshipful brother, after all 
duties of recommendation, I recommend me to you, 
desiring to hear of your prosperity and welfare, which 
I pray God long to continue to his pleasure, and to 
your heart's desire ; letting you weet that I received a 
letter from you, in the which letter was eight pence 
with the which I should buy a pair of slippers. 

Furthermore certifying you as for the thirteen 
and four pence which you sent by a gentleman's man, 
for my board, called Thomas Newton, was delivered 
to mine hostess, and so to my creancer, Mr. Thomas 
Stevenson ; and he heartily recommended him to you. 
Also you sent me word in the letter of twelve pounds 
of figs and eight pounds of raisins : I have them not 



"THK YOUNG GBNTLHVVOIVIAN " 29 

delivered, but I doubt not I shall have, for Alweder 
told me of them, and he said that they came after in 
another bar^e. 

And as for the young (gentlewoman, I will certify 
you how I first fell in acquaintance with her. Her 
father is dead ; there be two sisters of them ; the 
elder is just wedded ; at which wedding I was with 
mine hostess, and also desired by the gentleman 
himself, called William Swan, whose dwelling is in 
Eton. So it fortuned that mine hostess reported on 
me otherwise than I was worthy, so that her mother 
commanded her to make me good cheer, and so in 
good faith she did. She is not abiding where she is 
now, her dwelling is in London, but her mother and 
she came to a place of hers five miles from Eton, 
where the wedding was, because it was nigh to the 
gentleman, which wedded her daughter; and on 
Monday next coming, that is to say, the first Monday 
of clean Lent, her mother and she will go to the 
pardon at Sheen, and so forth to London, and there 
to abide in a place of hers in Bow Churchyard ; and 
if it please you to enquire of her, her mother's name 
is Mistress Alborow, the name of the daughter is 
Margaret Alborow; the age of her is, by all likelihood, 
eighteen or nineteen years at the farthest. And as 
for the money and plate, it is ready whensoever she 
were wedded; but as for the livelihood, I trow not 
till after her mother's decease, but I cannot tell you 
for very certain, but you may know by enquiring. 

And as for her beauty, judge you that, when you 
see her, if so be that ye take the labour ; and 
specially behold her hands, for, if it be as it is told me, 
she is disposed to be thick. 

And as for my coming from Eton, I lack nothing 
but versifying, which I trust to have with a little 
continuance 

Quare, Quomodo. Non valet hora, valet mora. 

Unde di | o | 

Arbore jam videas exemplum. Non die possunt 

Omne suppleri, sed tu ilia mora. 



30 MARRIAGE OF DUKE OF BURGUNDY 

And these two verses aforesaid be of mine own 
making. No more to you at this time, but God have 
you in his keeping. Written at Eton the even of 
Saint Mathias the Apostle in haste, with the hand of 
your brother. 

William Paston, Junior. 



XXVIII. To my riglit reverend and worshipful 
motlicr, Margaret Paston, dwelling at Caister, 
be this delivered in haste. 
(1468) 

Right reverend and worshipful mother, I recom- 
mend me unto you as humbly as I can think, desiring 
most heartily to hear of your welfare and heart's ease, 
which I pray God send you as hastily as any heart 
can think. 

Please it you to weet, that at the making of this 
bill, my brother and I, and all our fellowship, were in 
good hele, blessed be God. 

As for the guiding here in this country, it is as 
worshipful as all the world can devise, and there were 
never Englishmen had so good cheer out of England 
that ever I heard of. 

As for tidings here, but if it be of the feast, I can 
none send you, saving that my Lady Margaret was 
married on Sunday last past at a town that is called 
The Dame, three miles out of Bruges, at five of the 
clock in the morning ; and she was brought the same 
day to Bruges to her dinner; and there she was 
received as worshipfully as all the world could desire, 
as with procession with ladies and lords, best beseen 
of any people, that ever I saw or heard of. 

Many pageants were played in her way in Bruges 
to her welcoming, the best that ever I saw ; and the 
same day my Lord the Bastard, took upon him to 
answer twenty-four knights and gentlemen within eight 
days at jousts of peace. And when they were answered, 
they twenty-four and himself should tourney with other 
twenty-five the next day after, which is on Monday next 



JOUSTING AT BRUGES 31 

coming; and they that have jousted with him into this 
day, have been as riehly heseen, and himself also, as 
cloth of gold, and silk and silver, and goldsmith's work 
might make them ; for of such gear and gold, and pearls, 
and stones, they of the Duke's court, neither gentlemen 
nor gentlewomen, they want none; for without that 
they have it by wishes, by my troth, I heard never of 
so great plenty as here is. 

This day my Lord Scales jousted with a lord of 
this country, but not with the Bastard, for they made 
promise at London, that none of them both should 
never deal with (the) other in arms ; but the Bastard 
was one of the lords that brought the Lord Scales 
into the field ; and of misfortune a horse struck my 
Lord Bastard on the leg, and hath hurt him so sore, 
that I can think he shall be of no power to accomplish 
up his arms ; and that is great pity, for by my troth, I 
trow God made never a more worshipful knight. 

And as for the Duke's court, as of lords, ladies, and 
gentlewomen, knights, esquires and gentlemen, I heard 
never of none like to it, save King Arthur's court. 
And by my troth, I have no wit nor remembrance to 
write to you half the worship that is here, but what 
lacketh, as it cometh to mind I shall tell you when I 
come home, which I trust to God shall not be long to 
fore. We depart out of Bruges homeward on Tuesday 
next coming, and all folk that came with my Lady of 
Burgundy out of England except such as shall abide 
here still with her, which I wot well shall be but few. 

We depart the sooner, for the Duke hath word 
that the French king is purposed to make war upon 
him hastily, and that he is within four or five days' 
journey of Bruges and the Duke rideth, on Tuesday 
next coming, forward to meet with him ; God give him 
good speed and all his, for by my troth they are the 
goodliest fellowship that ever I came amongst and best 
can behave them, and most like gentlemen. 

Other tidings have we none here, but that the 
Duke of Somerset and all his bands departed well 
beseen out of Bruges a day before my Lady the 



32 ANNE PASTON'S MARRIAGE 

Duchess came thither, and they say here, that be is 
(gone) to Oueen Margaret that was, and shall no more 
come here again, nor be holpen by the Duke. 

No more, but 1 beseech you of your blessing as 

lowly as I can, which I beseech you forget not to give 

me every day once. And, mother, I beseech you that 

I ye will be good mistress to my little man, and to see 

that he go to school. 

I sent my cousin Daubeney five shillings by Calle's 
man, for to buy for him such gear as he needeth, and 
mother, I pray you this bill may recommend me to my 
sisters both, and to the master, my cousin Daubeney, 
Sir James, Sir John Stylle, and to pray him to be good 
master to little Jack and to learn him well, and I pray 
you that this bill may recommend me to all your folks 
and to my wellwishers. And I pray God send you 
your heart's desire. 

Written at Bruges the Friday next after Saint 
Thomas. 

Your son, and humble servant, 

J. Paston, the Younger. 

XXIX. To John Paston, the younger, be tliis 
delivered in haste. 

(Between 1466 and 1470.) 
I greet you well and send you God's blessing and 
mine, letting you weet that since ye departed my 
cousin Calthorpe sent me a letter complaining in his 
writing that forasmuch as he cannot be paid of his 
tenants as he hath been before this time, he proposeth 
to lessen his household and to live the straitlier, 
wherefore he desireth me to purvey for your sister 
Anne ; he saith she waxeth high and it were time to 
purvey her a marriage. I marvel what causeth him 
to write so now, either she hath displeased him or 
else he hath taken her with default ; therefore I pray 
you commune with my cousin Clere at London and weet 
how he is disposed to her ward, and send me word, for I 
shall be fain to send for her, and with me she shall 



FOUR WAR-LIKE MEN 33 

but lose her time, and without she will be the better 
occupied she shall often times move me and put me ^ 
in great inquietness. Remember what labour I had \ 
with your sister, therefore do your part to help her ^ 
forth, that may be to yom- worship and mine. 

Item, remember the bill that I spake to you of to 
get of your brother of such money as he hath received 
of me since your father's decease ; see your uncle 
Maultby if ye may, and send me some tidings as soon 
as ye may ; God keep you. Written the Friday next 
before Saint Thomas of Canterbury, in haste. 

By your mother, 

Margaret Paston. 



XXX. To my right well-beloved brother John 
Paston Esq. being at Caister, or to John 
Daubeney there, be this letter delivered. 

(1468) 

Right well-beloved brother, I commend me to 
you, letting you weet that I have waged, for to help 
you and Daubeney to keep the place at Caister, four 
well assured and true men to do all manner of things 
that they be desired to do in safeguard or inforcing of 
the said place, and moreover they be proved men, and 
cunning in war and in feats of arms, and they can 
well shoot both guns and cross-bows, and amend and 
string them, and devise bulwarks, or any things that 
should be a strength to the place, and they will, as 
need is, keep watch and ward. They be sad and 
well-advised men, saving one of them, which is bald 
and called William Peny, which is as good a man as 
goeth on the earth saving a little. He will, as I 
understand, be a little copschotyn, but yet he is no 
brawler, but full of courtesy, much upon James 
Halman. The other three be named Peryn Sale, 
John Chapman, Robert Jackson, saving that as yet 
they have none harness come, but when it cometh it 

p. L. 3 



34 LIVERIES 

shall be sent to you, and in the meanwhile I pray you 
and Daubeney to purvey them some. 

Also a couple of beds they must needs have, which 
1 pray you by the help of my mother to purvey for 
them till that I come home to you. Ye shall find them 
gentlemanly comfortable fellows, and that they will 
and dare abide by their tackling, and if ye understand 
that any assault should be towards, I send you these 
men, because that men of the country thereabout you 
should be frayed for fear of loss of their goods ; 
wherefore if there were any such thing towards, I 
would ye took of men of the country but few, and 
that they were well assured men, for else they might 
discourage all the remanent. 

;;< :1: ::':■ '.',: * * * * 

Written on Wednesday next before St Martin. 

John Paston. 

:J: ^ :jc ;t: H< ;N -!< -fi 

Also, that these men be at the beginning entreated 
as courteously as ye can. 

Also, I pray you to send me my flower by the next 
messenger that cometh. 

-.;; =;; :;; >\: -.;: * * * 

Also, as for the Bible that the master hath, I 
thought the utmost price had not past five marks, and 
so I trow he will give it, weet I pray you. 

XXXI. To my Mother and to my Brother 
John Paston. 

(1469 or 1474) 

Brother, it is so that the King shall come into 
Norfolk in haste, and I wot not whether that I may 
come with him or not; if I come I must do make a livery 
of twenty gowns, which I must pick out by your advice ; 
and as for the cloth for such persons as be in that 
country, if it might be had there at Norwich or not, 
1 wot not ; and what persons 1 am not remembered. 



SURRENDER OF CAISTER 35 

If my mother be at Caistcr, as there shall be no 
doubt, for the keepinc; of the place while the King is 
in that country, that I may have the most part at 
Caister; and whether ye will offer yourself to wait 
upon my Lord of Norfolk or not, I would ye did that 
best were to do ; I would do my lord pleasure and 
service, and so I would ye did, if I wist to be sure of 
his good lordship in time to come. He shall have 
two hundred in a livery blue and tawny, and blue on 
the left side, and both dark colours. 

I pray you send me word, and your advice by 
Juddy of what men and what horse I could be purveyed 
of, if so be that I must needs come, and of your advice 
in all things by writing, and I shall send you hastily 
other tidings. Let Sorrell be well kept. 

John Paston, Kt. 



XXXII. To Sir John Paston, knight. 

(1469) 

Right worshipful Sir, I recommend me unto you, 
and as for the certainty of the deliverance of Caister, 
John Chapman can tell you how that we were 
enforced thereto, as well as myself. As for John 
Chapman and his three fellows I have purveyed that 
they be paid each of them 40 shillings with the money 
that they had of you and Daubeney ; and that is 
enough for the season that they have done you 
service ; I pray you give them their thank, for by my 
troth they have as well deserved it as any men that 
ever bore life ; but as for money ye need not to give 
them without ye will, for they be pleased with their 
wages. 

Wryttill promised me to send you the certainty of 
the appointment, we were for lack of victuals, gun- 
powder, men's hearts, lack of surety of rescue, driven 
thereto to take appointment. 

3—2 



36 GATHERER OF THE GREEN-WAX 

If ye will that I come to you, send me word and I 
shall purvey me for to tarry with you a two or three 
days ; by my troth the rewarding of such folks as hath 
been with me during the siege, hath put me in great 
danger for the money. God preserve you, and I pray 
you be of good cheer till I speak with you, and I trust 
to God to ease your heart in some things. 

John Paston. 



XXXIII. To John Paston, Esquire, be this 
delivered. 

(1469—70) 

Also I pray you speak to Playters that there may 
be found a mean that the Sheriff or the gatherer of 
the green-wax may be discharged of certain issues 
that ran upon Fastolf for Maryot's matter, for the 
bailiff was at him this week and should have distrained 
him, but that he promised him that he should within 
this eight days labour the means that he should be 
discharged, or else he must content him, etc.. 

Also I send you by the bearer hereof, closed in 
this letter, 5s. of gold and pray you to buy me a sugar 
loaf, and dates and almonds, and send it me home, 
and if ye beware any more money, when ye come 
home I shall pay it you again. The Holy Ghost keep 
you both and deliver you of your enemies. Written 
on Saint Agas Day, in haste. 

Item, I pray you speak to Master Roger for my 
syrup, for I had never more need thereof, and send it 
me as hastily as ye can. 

By 

Margaret Paston. 



THE EARL OF OXFORD 37 

XXXIV. To Sir John Paston, Knight. 
(1469—70) 
Right worshipful and my especial true-hearted 
friend, I commend me unto you, praying you to ordain 
me three horses' harness as goodly as ye and Genyns 
can devise, as it were for yourself, and that I may 
have them in all haste, order. Also Skern saith, ye 
would ordain two standard staves. This I pray you 
to remember and my wife shall deliver you silver, and 
yet she must borrow it. Six or seven pounds I would 
bestow on a horse harness, and so Skern told me I 
might have. The Lord Hastings had (one) for the 
same price, but I would not mine were like his : and I 
trust to God we shall do right well, who preserve you. 
Written at Canterbury in haste, the 18th day of July. 

OXVNFORD. 



XXXV. To my right worshipful Mother, 
Margaret Paston, at Mawteby. 

(Between 1470 and 1474) 

Right Worshipful Mother, after all humble re- 
commendations, as lowlj'^ as I can, I beseech you of 
your blessing. 

Please you to weet that late yester night I came 
to Norwich, purposing to have been at this day with 
you at Mawteby, but it is so that I may not hold my 
purpose, for he that shall pay me my quarter wages 
for me and my retinue is in Norwich, and waiteth 
hourly when his money shall come to him. It is one 
Edmund Bowen of the Exchequer, a special friend of 
mine, and he adviseth me to tarry till the money be 
come, lest that I be unpaid, " for who conieth first to 
the mill, first must grind." 

And as I was writing this bill, one of the grooms 
of my lord's chamber came to me, and told me that 
my lady will be here in Norwich tomorrow at night 



38 A HORSE FOR JOHN PASTON 

towards Walsingham, which shall, I wot well, be 
another let to me, but I had more need to be other- 
wise occupied than to await on ladies, for there is as 
yet, I trow, no spear that shall go over the sea so 
evil horsed as I am, but it is told me that Richard 
Calle hath a good horse to sell, and one John Butcher 
of Oxborough hath another, and if it might please you 
to give Sym leave to ride into that country at my 
cost, and in your name, saying that ye will give one of 
your sons a horse, desiring him that he will give you a 
pennyworth for a penny, and he shall, and the price be 
reasonable, hold him pleased with your payment out of 
my purse, though he know it not ere his horse depart 
from his hands. Mother, I beseech you, and it may 
please you to give Sym leave to ride on this message 
in your name that he may be here with me tomorrow 
in the morning betimes, for were I once horsed, I 
trow I were as far forth ready as some of my 
neighbours- 

I heard a little word that ye purposed to be here 
in Norwich the next week, I pray God it be this 
week. 

Mother, I beseech you that I may have an answer 
tomorrow at the farthest of this matter and of any 
other service that it please you to command me, 
which I will at all seasons (be) ready to accomplish 
with God's grace, whom 1 beseech to preserve you 
and yours. 

Written at Norwich, this Wednesday in Easter 
week. 

By your son and servant, 

John Paston. 



BROMHOLM PRIORY CHURCH 39 

XXXVI, To his well -beloved John Paston, Esquire, 
at Norwich, or to Mrs Margaret, his Mother. 

(1471) 

I commend me to you I would fain have the 

measure where my father Heth at Bromholm ; both 
the thickness, and compass of the pillar at his head, 
and from that the space to the altar, and the thick- 
ness of that altar and imagery of timber work and 
what height the arch is to the ground of the aisle, and 
how high the ground of the choir is higher than the 
ground of the aisle. 

Item, I pray you let the measure by packthread be 
taken, or else measured by yard, how much is from 
the North Gate, where the brigg was at Gresham to 
the south wall and in like form from the east side to 
the west, also the height of the east wall, and the 
height of the south-east tower from the ground, if ye 
may easily. Also what breadth every tower is within 
the wall and which tower is more than other within. 
Also how many foot or what breadth each tower 
taketh within each corner of the quadrate overthwart 
the doors, and how many tailor's yards is from the 
mote side where the brigg was to the highway, or to 
the hedge all along the entry, and what breadth the 
entry is between the dykes. 

I pray you, if ye have a leisure in any wise, see this 
done yourself if ye may, or else if Pampyng do it, or 
who that ye think can do it, I would spend twenty 
pence or as ye seem, to have the certain of every 
thing herein. 

And as for my father's tomb, I charge you see it 
yourself, and when I speak with you, I will tell you 
the causes why that I desire this to be done. 

As for tidings, the King and the Queen and much 
other people are ridden and gone to Canterbury, never 
so much people seen in pilgrimage heretofore at once, 
as men say. 

Also it is said that the Earl of Pembroke is taken 
into Brittany, and men say that the King shall have 



40 AFTER THE BATTLE OF BARNET 

delivery of him hastily, and some say that the King of 
France will see him safe and shall set him at liberty 
again. 

Item, Thomas Fauconbridge his head was yesterday 
set upon London Bridge looking into Kent ward, and 
men say that his brother was sore hurt and escaped 
to sanctuary to Beverley, Sir Thomas Fulforth 
escaped out of Westminster with a hundred spears as 
men say, and is into Devonshire and there he hath 
stricken off Sir John Crokker's head, and killed 
another knight of the Courtenays as men say. I 
would ye had your very pardon at once, wherefore I 
pray you fail not to be at London within four days 
after Saint Faith's ; ye shall do good in many things, 
and I pray you send me word hereof by the next 
messenger, and if it come to Mrs Elizabeth Higgens, 
at the Black Swan, she shall convey it to me, for I 
will not fail to be there at London again within this 
six days. 

JVlrs Elizabeth hath a son, and was delivered 
within two days after Saint Bartholomew, and her 
daughter A. H. was, the next day after, delivered of 
another son, as she saith eleven weeks ere her time. 
It was christened John, and is dead, God save all. 
No more till I speak with you. 

Written at London on Michaelmas Even. 

John Paston, Knight. 



XXXVII. To my right worshipful brother, 
Sir John Paston, Kniglit. 

(1472, or perhaps 1470) 

Right worshipful sir, I recommend me to you 

Item, Master John Smythe telleth me, that Sir 
T. Lyney's goods are not able to pay a quarter of his 
debts that be asked him, wherefore such money as is 
beleft, must be divided to every man a part after the 
quantity, which division is not yet made, but when it 



THE EARL OF ARRAN 41 

is made he hath promised me that your part shall be 
worth three the best, etc. 

Item, as for one of Berney's horse, whoso hath 
least need to him, he shall cost him twenty marks not 
a penny less. 

Ye sent me word of the marriage of my Lady 
Jane ; one marriage for another one, Norse and 
Bedford were asked in the church on Sunday last 
past. 

As for my sister Anne, my Mother will not remove 
from W. Yelverton for Bedyngfield, /or she hath 
communed farther in that matter, since ye were in 
this country, as it appeareth in her letter, that she 
sendeth you by Thyrston. 

iji :^< ^ t- ■\: ^ 4^ 4: 

John Osbern adviseth you to take breath for the 
wood sale at Sporle, for he hath cast it, that it is 
worth as good as nine score pounds. Beware of 
Montayn, for he may not pay you so much money 
with his ease. 

I pray you recommend me to Sir John Parr with 
all my service, and tell him by my troth, I longed 
never sorer to see my lady than I do to see his 
mastership; and I pray God that he arise never a 
morning from my lady his wife, without it be against 
her will, till such time as he bring her to Our Lady of 
Walsingham. 

Also I pray you to recommend me in my most 
humble wise unto the good Lordship of the most 
courteous, gentlest, wisest, kindest, most companion- 
able, freest, largest, and most bounteous knight, 
my Lord the Earl of Arran, which hath married 
the King's sister of Scotland. Hereto he is one 
the lightest, delyverst, best spoken, fairest archer; 
devoutest, most perfect and truest to his lady of all 
the knights that ever I was acquainted with. So 
would God my lady liked me as well as I do his 
person and most knightly conditions, with whom I 
pray you to be acquainted, as (to) you seemeth best; 
he is lodged at the George in Lombard Street. He 



42 CAPTURE OF CHANNEL BOATS 

hath a book of my sister Anne's of the siege of 
Thebes ; when he hath done with it, he promised to 
dehver it you. I pray you let Portland bring the 
book home with him. Portland is lodged at the 
George in Lombard Street also. 

And this I promise you, ye shall not be so long 
again without a bill from me, as ye have been, though 
I should write how oft the wind changeth, for I see 
by your writing ye can be wrath, and ye will, for 
little. 

Written the fifth day of June. 

John Paston. 



XXXVI IL To John Paston, Esquire, at Norwich, 
be this delivered. 

(1473) 

Worshipful and well-beloved brother, I commend 
me to you, letting you weet, that the world seemeth 
queasy here, for the most part that be about the King 
have sent hither for their harness, and it (is) said for 
certain, that the Duke of Clarence maketh him big in 
that he can, shewing as he would but deal with the 
Duke of Gloucester, but the King intendeth, in 
eschewing all inconvenience, to be as big as they 
both, and to be a stiffler atween them, and some men 
think, that under this there should be some other 
thing intended, and some treason conspired, so what 
shall fall, can I not say. 

Item, it is said that yesterday two passagers of 
Dover were taken, I fear that if Juddy had no hasty 
passage, so that if he passed not on Sunday or 
Monday, that he is taken, and some gear of mine, 
that I would not for £20. I hope and purpose to go 
to Calais-ward on Sunday or Monday or nigh by, for 
I came not accompanied to do any service here ; 
wherefore it were better for me to be out of sight. 

Item, Spring, that waited on my father when he 



THE KING'S GREAT SEAL 43 

was in gaol house, whom my father, at his dyino beset 
40s. he cryeth ever on me for it, and in way of alms, 
and he would be eased, though it were but twenty 
shilHngs, or ten shiUings, wherefore he hath written to 
my mother, and must have an answer again ; I would 
that my mother send him, as though she lend him 
somewhat, and he will be pleased, and else he can say 
as shrewdly as any man in England. 

Item, the King hath sent for his great seal; some 
say we shall have a new Chancellor, but some think 
that the King doth as he did at the last fields, he will 
have the seal with him, but this day Doctor Morton, 
Master of the Rolls, rideth to the King, and beareth 
the seals with him. 

Item, I had never more need of money than now, 
wherefore Fastolf's five marks and the money of 
Master John Smith would make me whole. 

Written on St Leonard's day, in the thirteenth 
year of the reign of Edward IV. 

Item, send me my vestment, according to the 
letter I sent you by Symond Dam, in all haste. 

John Paston, Knight. 



XXXIX. To John Pasfon, Esquire, be 
this delivered. 

(1473) 
Right worshipful brother, I recommend me to you, 
letting you weet that this day I was in very purpose 
to Calais ward, all ready to have gone to the barge, 
save I tarried for a young man that I thought to have 
had with me thither, one that was with Rows, which 
is in the country ; and because I could not get him, 
and that I have no more here with me but Pampyng, 
Edward, and Jack, therefore Pampyng remembered 
me that at Calais he told me, that he purposed to be 
with the Duchess of Norfolk, my lady and yours. 
And Edward is sick, and seemeth not abiding; he 



44 GOOD ARCHERS WANTED 

would see what shall fall of this world ; and so I am 
as he that saith " Come hither, John, my man ". 
And as hap was yesterday, Juddy went before to 
Calais ward, wherefore I am now ill purveyed ; which 
for aught that I know yet, is like to keep me here this 
Whitsuntide. Wherefore if ye know any likely men, 
and fair conditioned, and good archers, send them to 
me, though it be four, and I will have them, and they 
shall have four marks by the year, and my livery. 

He may come to me hither to the Goat, or yet to 
Calais with a rial if he be wise, which if need be, I 
would that Barker took him to come up with, if it be 
such one as ye trust. 

Item, I suppose both Pytt and Kothye Plattyng 
shall go from me in haste ; I will never cherish knaves 
so as I have done, for their sakes. 

Item, I pray you send me a new vestment of white 
damask for a deacon, which is amongst mine other 
gear at Norwich, for he shall thereto as ye wot of; 
I will make an arming doublet of it, though I should 
another time give a long gown of velvet for another 
vestment, and send it in all haste to Hoxon to send 
me. 

I hoped to have been very merry at Calais this 
Whitsuntide and am well apparelled and appointed, 
save that these folks fail me so, and I have matter 
there to make of right excellent. Some man would 
have hasted him to Calais, though he had had no 
better errand, and some men think it wisdom and 
profit to be there now well out of the way. 

* ;;; :;: * * ;;: ;;: * 

No more but God keep you. Written at London 
the 3rd day of June, in the thirteenth year of 
Edward IV. 

John Paston, Knight. 



SIR JOHN PASTON'S MEN 45 

XL. To Edniitiid Paston, Esquire, at 
Calais, be this delivered. 

{1473) 

Brother Edmund, I tjreet you well, letting you 
weet that about this day se'night I sent you a letter 
by Nicholas Bardeslcy, a soldier, which is wont to be 
at (the) border perauntys ; and also a hosecloth of 
black for you ; I wend that ye should have had it 
within two days, but I am afraid that he deceived me. 

Item, I let you weet that Plattyng is coming 
hither, and he saith that ye gave him leave to fetch 
his gear and Pytt's; and that is his errand hither and 
none other, nor he thought never to go from me, nor 
will he not go from me, as he saith ; wherefore I pray 
you send me word of his conditions, and why ye think 
that he should never do me worship. 

He saith also, that he and Pytt were at the taking 
of the Esterlings, and that he was in the "Packer" 
and Pytt in the "Christopher"; I pray you send me 
word how both he and Pytt quit them, by the report 
of some indifferent true man that was there ; if they 
quit them well, I would love them the better; 
wherefore the next day after the sight of this letter, 
I pray you write again, and send it by the next passage. 

Item, I send you a little pretty box herewith, 
which 1 would that Juddy should deliver to the 
woman that he weeteth of, and pray her to take it to 
the man that she weeteth of; that is to say, as much 
as ye know all well enough, but ye may not make you 
wise in no wise. 

Item, I pray you send me word as ye were wont to 
do of her welfare, and whether 1 were out and other 
in or not; and whether she shall forsake Calais as 
soon as ye sent me word of, or not. 

By God I would be with you as fain as yourself, 
and shall be in haste, with God's grace. 

Item, as for my brother John, I hope within this 
month to see him in Calais, for by likelihood tomorrow, 
or else the next day, he taketh ship at Yarmouth, and 



48 "MY BILL THAT IS GILT" 

goeth to Saint James-ward, and he hath written to 
me that he will come homeward by Calais. 

Item, I suppose that James Son.<:;er shall come 
with me to Calais, the rather for your sake. 

Item, Mistress Elizabeth fareth well, but as yet 
Songer knoweth not so perfectly all that ye would 
weet, that he will not write to you of these two days, 
till he know more ; but if she had been bold, and 
durst have abided still at her gate, and spoken with 
me, so God help me, she had had this same (box) that 
I send now, where ye wot of, which ye shall see worn 
hereafter; it is a pretty ribbon with pretty aglets and 
goodly. 

Make you not wise to Juddy neither not that ye 
would weet anything, for I may say to you, at his 
coming over he brought goodly gear reasonably. 

Item, as for my bill that is gilt, I would it were 
taken heed to ; there is one in the town, that can 
glaze well enough as I heard say ; also there is one 
Cometh every market day from St Omers to Calais, 
and he bringeth daggers and fetcheth also, he may 
have it with him, and bring it again the next market 
day for \2d. or I6d. at the most; and else let it be 
well oiled and kept till I come. 

No more. Written at London the 5th day of 
July, in the thirteenth year of Edward IV. 

John Paston, Knight. 



XLI. To John Paston, Esquire. 

(1474) 

Brother, I recomimend me to you letting you weet, 
that I have, like as I promised you, I have done my 
devoir to know my Lady Walgrave's stomach, which, 
as God help me, and to be plain to you, I find in her 
no matter nor cause, that I might take comfort of. 

She will in no wise receive nor keep your ring 
with her, and yet I told her that she should not be 
anything bound thereby; but that I knew by your 



STORY OF A MUSKBALL 47 

heart of old that I wist well ye would be glad to 
forbear the levest thing that ye had in the world, 
which might be daily in her presence, that should 
cause her once on a day to remember you ; but it 
would not be. She would not thereby, as she said, 
put you nor keep you in any comfort thereby. And 
moreover, she prayed me, that I should never take 
labour more herein, for she would hold herself to such 
answer as she had given you tofore ; wherewith she 
thought both ye and I would have held us content, 
had (it) not been (for) the words of her sister 
Genevieve. When I understood all this, and that 
over night she bade her that went between her and 
me bid me bring with me her muskball which etc., then 
I after all this, asked if she were displeased with me for 
it, and she said, nay. 

Then I told her, that I had not sent it you, for sin 
of my soul ; and so I told her all, how I had written 
to you why that I would not send it you, because I 
wist well ye should have sleeped the worse ; but now 
I told her, as God help me, that I would send it you, 
and give you mine advice not to hope over much on her, 
which is over hard an hearted lady for a young man 
to trust unto ; which I thought that for all my words, 
ye could not nor would not do for all mine advice. 

Yet againwards she is not displeased, nor forbid 
me not but that ye should have the keeping of her 
muskball; wherefore do ye with it as ye like. I would 
it had done well ; by God I spake for you so, that in 
faith I trow I could not say so well again. Wherefore 
I send you herewith your ring and the unhappy 
muskball. Also make ye matter of it hereafter as ye 
can, I am not happy to woo neither for myself nor 
none other. I told her all the process of the Lord 
Howard and of your grounds as I could; all helps not. 

* * >;< * ;|< * ;;; ::= 

I hear no word of my vessel nor of my books; I 
marvel. No more. Written at London the 11th day 
of December in the fourteenth year of Edward IV. 

John Paston, Knight. 



3 DEATH OF THE DUKE OF NORFOLK 



XLII. [This letter has no direction, but it is 
written either to John Paston, Esquire, or 
Margaret Paston.] 

(1475) 

Like it you to weet, that not in the most happy 
season for me, it is so fortuned, that whereas my 
Lord of Norfolk, yesterday being in good health, this 
night died about midnight, wherefore it is for all that 
loved him to do and help now that, that may be to 
his honour, and weal to his soul. And it is so, that 
this country is not well purveyed of cloth of gold for 
the covering for his body and herse ; wherefore every 
man helping to his power, I put the Council of my 
lord in comfort, that I hoped to get one for that day, 
if it were so that it be not broken, or put to other use. 

Wherefore please it you to send me word if it be 
so, that ye have, or can come by, the cloth of tissue, 
that I bought for our father's tomb, and I undertake 
it shall be saved again for you unhurt at my peril ; I 
deem hereby to get great thanks, and great assistance 
in time to come ; and that either Sym or Mother 
Brown may deliver it me tomorrow by seven of the 
clock. 

Item, as for other means, I have sent my servant 
Richard Toring to London, which I hope shall bring 
me good tidings again, and within four days I hope to 
see you. 

Written on Wednesday the 17th day of January, 
in the fifteenth year of Edward IV. 

John Paston, Knight. 



SIR JOHN PASTON'S GOWNS 49 



XLIII. To John Paston Esquire, at Norwich, 
be til is delivered. 

(i47,^) 

Item, I wend to have found a gown of mine here, 
but it came home the same day that I came out, 
brought by Harry Barker, loader. I would in all 
haste possible have that same gown of puke furred 
with white lamb. 

Item, I would have my long russet gown of the 
French russet in all haste, for I have no gown to go 
in here. 

Item, I pray you recommend me to my mother, 
and let us all pray God send my lady of Norfolk a 
son, for upon that resteth much matter; for if the 
king's son marry my lord's daughter, the king would 
that his son should have a fair place in Norfolk, 
though he should give me two times the value in 
other land as I am done to weet. I pray you send 
me word of my lady's speed as soon as ye can. 

Item, as for Bowen I shall feel him, and should 
have done though ye had not sent. 

Item, there is offered me a good marriage for my 
sister Anne, Skipwith's son and heir of Lincolnshire, 
a man (of) 500 or 600 marks by the year. 

No more. Written at London, the 27th day of 
January, in the fifteenth year of Edward IV. 

Item, 'my lady of Exeter is dead, and it was said, 
that the old Duchess of Norfolk and the Countess of 
Oxford were dead, but it is not so yet. 

Item, I shall remember Calais both for horse and 
all, etc. 

[John Paston, Knight.] 



p. L. 



50 MARGERY BREWS' LOVE-LETTER 



XLIV. Unto my right well-beloved Valentine, John 
Paston, Esquire, be tJiis bill delivered, etc. 

(1476-7) 
Right reverend and worshipful and my right 
well-beloved Valentine, I recommend me unto you, 
full heartily desiring to hear of your welfare, which I 
beseech Almighty God long for to preserve unto His 
pleasure and your heart's desire. And if it please 
you to hear of my welfare, I am not in good heele of 
body, nor of heart, nor shall be till I hear from you : 

For there wottys no creature what pain that I endure, 
And for to be dead, I dare it not discur'. 

And my lady my mother hath laboured the matter 
to my father full diligently, but she can no more get 
than ye know of, for the which God knoweth 1 am full 
sorry. But if that ye love me, as I trust verily that 
ye do, ye will not leave me therefore ; for if that ye 
had not half the livelihood that ye have, for to do the 
greatest labour that any woman alive might, I would 
not forsake you. 

And if ye command me to keep me true wherever I go, 

I wis I will de all my might you to love, and never no mo(re). 

And if my friends say, that I do amiss, 

They shall not me let so for to do, 

Mine heart me bids ever more to love you 

Truly over all earthly thing, 

And if they be never so wrath 

I trust it shall be better in time coming. 

No more to you at this time, but the Holy Trinity 
have you in keeping. And I beseech you that this 
bill be not seen of none earthly creature save only 
yourself, etc. 

And this letter was endited at Topcroft, with full 
heavy heart, etc. 

By your own 

Margery Brews. 



LETTER TO JOHN PASTON 51 

XLV. To my right well-beloved cousin John 

Paston, Esquire, be this letter delivered, etc. 

(1476—7) 

Right worshipful and well-beloved Valentine, in 
my most humble wise, I recommend me unto you, etc. 
And heartily I thank you for the letter, which that ye 
send me by John Beckerton, whereby I understand 
and know that ye be purposed to come to Topcroft 
in short time, and without any errand or matter, but 
only to have a conclusion of the matter betwixt my 
father and you ; I would be most glad of any creature 
alive so that the matter might grow to effect. And 
thereas ye say, and ye come and find the matter no 
more towards you than ye did aforetime, ye would no 
more put my father and my lady my mother to no 
cost nor business, for that cause a good while after, 
which causeth my heart to be full heavy ; and if that 
ye come, and the matter take to none effect, then 
should I be much more sorry, and full of heaviness. 

And as for myself I have done and understand in 
the matter that 1 can or may as God knoweth ; and I 
let you plainly understand, that my father will no 
more money part withal in that behalf, but a hundred 
pounds and fifty marks, which is right far from the 
accomplishment of your desire. 

Wherefore if that ye could be content with that 
good, and my poor person, I would be the merriest 
maiden on ground ; and if ye think not yourself so 
satisfied, or that ye might have much more good, as I 
have understood by you afore ; good, true and loving 
Valentine, that ye take no such labour upon you, as 
to come more for that matter, but let (what) is, pass, 
and never more to be spoken of, as I may be your 
true lover and beadwoman during my life. 

No more unto you at this time, but Almighty Jesu 
preserve you both body and soul, etc. 

By your Valentine, 

Margery Brews. 

4—2 



52 MARRIAGE ARRANGEMENTS 

XLVI. Unto my right xvorshipful master, John 
Paston, Esquire, be tJiis bill delivered, etc. 
(J476— 7) 

Right worshipful Sir, I recommend me unto you ; 
letting you know, as for the young gentlewoman, she 
oweth you her good heart and love, as I know by the 
communication that I have had with her for the same. 

And, Sir, ye know what my master and my lady 
have proffered with her — 200 marks — and I daresay 
that her chamber and arayment shall be worth 100 
marks. And I heard my lady say that and the case 
required, both ye and she should have your board 
with my lady three years after. 

And I understand by my lady that she would that 
ye should labour the matter to my master, for it 
should be better. And I heard my lady say, 

" That it was a feeble oak 
That was cut down at the first stroke." 

And ye be beholden unto my lady for her good 
word, for she has never praised you too much. Sir, 
like as I promised you, I am your man, and my good 
will ye shall have in word and deed, etc. 

And Jesu have you in His merciful keeping, etc. 

By your man 

Thomas Kela. 

XLVI I. To Master Sir John Paston, be this 
letter delivered in Calais. 

(1476) 

Honour and joy be to you my right good master, 
and most assured brother: letting you know that all 
your well-willers and servants in these parts, that I 
know, fare well and better would if they might hear 
of your well being, and forthwith some of your French 
and Burgundy tidings ; for we in these parts be in 
great dread lest the French King with some assaults 
should in any wise disturb you of your soft, sote and 



QUALITIES OF A GOOD HORSE 53 

sure sleeps, but as yet we nothing can hear that he so 
disposeth him. 

;;: :;: ***** :!< 

Sir, furthermore, I beseech you as ye will do 
anything for me, that ye see one day for my sake, and 
for your own pleasure, all the good horse in -Calais, 
and if there be amongst them any prized horse of 
deeds, that is to sell, in especial that he be well 
trotting of his own courage without force of spurs, 
and also a steering horse, if he be, he is the better. 
I pray you send me word of his colour, deeds and 
courage, and also of his price, feigning as ye would 
buy him yourself, and also I would have him some- 
what large, not with the largest, but no small horse, 
as (no?) more than a double horse; praying you above 
all things to have this in remembrance and that 
hastily as may be, for there is late promised me help 
to such an intent, and I wote not how long it shall 
endure; and therefore I beseech you send me word 
by time. 

I trow the Frenchmen have taken up all the good 
horse in Picardy, and also they be wont to be heavy 
horse in labour, and that I love not ; but a heavy 
horse of flesh and light of courage I love well, for I 
love no horse that will always be lean and slender like 
greyhounds. God keep you. 

Your 

John Pympe. 

I pray you to recommend me to my cousin, Sir 
John Scot and all his, in especial Mrs Bedingfeld. 



XLVIII. Unto the right Worshipful Sir John 
Paston, Knight. 

(1477) 

Master Paston, after all due recommeiidation, and 

hearty desire to hear of your good hele, please it you 

to weet, I have spoken with Sir John of Middylton, 

as well as I could and it had been for myself, for his 



54 BARGAINING FOR A HORSE 

hobby (horse) that ye desired, and told him he might 
well forbear him now, inasmuch as Mrs Jane was 
dead, and that it is a great cost for him to keep more 
horse than he needeth, and he answered me that he 
would sell him with good will, but there should no 
man buy him under £10 Flemish ; and I offered him 
in your name 10 marks, for he would not hear of no 
other ambling horse that ye might give him therefore. 
And also my lord desired to have bought him for 
the Lord Schauntrell that is chief captain of St 
Omers; and he would (for) no less let my lord have 
him than £10, and so my lord bought another and gave 
him the said lord, for he thought this too dear, never- 
theless he will not sell him to no man under that 
money that he set him on, and so ye may buy your 
pleasure in him and ye list, for otherwise he will not 
do for you as I conceive. 

And as I understand, the emperor's son is married 
at Ghent as this day, and there came with him but 
400 horse, and I can hear of no more that be coming 
in certain, and in money he bringeth with him an 
hundred thousand ducats, which is but a small thing 
in regard for that he hath to do ; wherefore I fear me 
sore that Flanders will be lost ; and if St Omers be 
won, all is gone in my conceit, nevertheless they say 
there should come great power after the emperor's 
son, but I believe it not because they have been so 
long of coming. 

And I pray you to recommend me to Sir Terry 
Robsart, and that it please you to let him know of 
your tidings, and our Lord have you in his keeping. 

At Calais, the Sunday next after the Assumption. 

Your 

Edmund Bedyngfeld. 



CLOTH OF GOLD 55 



XLIX. To my right xcorshipfid mother, Margaret 
Paston, be this delivered. 

(1478) 

Please it you to weet, that whereas I intended to 
have been at home this Midsummer, and purposed 
with your good help to have begun upon my father's 
tomb, so that it might have been ended this summer; 
it is so, that for such causes as are now begun between 
my Lord of Suffolk and me, for the Manors of 
Heylesdon, Drayton, etc. for which matters I must 
needs be here this next term ; therefore I deem it 
would be after Midsummer, ere than I can see you. 

Please it you also to weet that I communed with 
Master Pykenham to weet if he would buy the cloth 
of gold for so much as he desired once to have bought 
it, and he offered me once 20 marks therefor, never- 
theless it cost me £24 ; yet now, when that I spake to 
him thereof, he refused to buy it, and said that he had 
now so many charges that he may not. But it is so 
that the King doth make certain copes and vestments 
of like cloth, which he intendeth to give to the College 
of Fotheringay, where my Lord his father is now 
buried, and he buyeth at a great price. 

I communed with the vestment maker for to help 
me forth with 12 yards, and he hath granted to do, as 
Wheatley can tell you ; wherefore, if it please you 
that it be bestowed for to make a tomb for my father 
at Bromholm, if ye like to send it hither, if it be sold 
I undertake ere Michaelmas that there shall be a 
tomb, and somewhat else over my father's grave, on 
whose soul God have mercy, that there shall none be 
like it in Norfolk ; and as ye shall be glad hereafter 
to see it ; and God send me leisure that I may come 
home, and if I do not, yet the money shall be put to 
none other use, but kept by some other that ye trust, 
till that it may be bestowed according as is above 
written, and else I give you cause never to trust me 
while ye and 1 live. When I was last with you, ye 



56 DESKS FOR THE CHOIR 

granted that the said cloth of gold should be bewared 
about this work, that is above written, which if ye will 
perform, I undertake that there shall be such a tomb 
as ye shall be pleased with, though it cost me twenty 
marks of mine own purse beside, if I once set upon it. 

No more, but 1 beseech God have you in his 
keeping. 

Written at London the Wednesday in Whitsun 
week, in the eighteenth year of Edward IV. 

Please it you to send me word by Wheatley of your 
pleasure herein. 

By your son, 

John Paston, Knight. 

L. To the ri^ht worshipful Sir John 
Paston, Knight. 

(147S) 

I greet you well and send you God's blessing and 
mine, letting you weet that I have sent you by 
Wheatley the cloth of gold, charging you that it be 
not sold to none other use than to the performing of 
your father's tomb as ye sent me word in writing ; if 
ye sell it to any other use, by my troth, I shall never 
trust you while I live. 

Remember that it cost me twenty marks, the 
pledging out of it, and if I were not glad to see that 
made, I would not depart from it. Remember what 
charge I have had with you of late, which will not be 
for my ease this two years; when ye may, better, I 
trust ye wall remember it. 

My cousin Clere doth as much cost at Bromholm 
as will draw an hundred pounds upon the desks in 
the choir, and in other places, and Heydon in likewise, 
and if there should nothing be done for your father it 
would be too great a shame for us all, and in chief to 
see him lie as he doth. 

Also as I understand it, my cousin Robert Clere 
thinketh great unkindness in dealing with him of 



MARGARET PASTON TO HER SON 57 

Peacock, for certain pasture that ye granted him to 
have and Peacock hath let it to others such as he 
Ust to let it to, notwithstanding my cousin hath laid 
the pasture with his cattle, and Peacock has distrained 
them. 

I think this dealing is not as it should be. I would 
that each of you would do for other and live as 
kinsmen and friends ; for such servants may make 
trouble betwixt you, which were against courtesy so 
nigh neighbours as ye be. He is a man of substance 
and worship and so will be taken in this shire; and I 
were loath that ye should lose the goodwill of such as 
may do for jou. 
Item, whereas ye have begun your claim in 
Heylesdon and Drayton I pray God send you good 
speed, and furtherance in it. Ye have as good a 
season as ye would wish, considering that your 
adversary stands not in best favour with the King. 

Also ye have the voice in this country, that ye 
may do as much with the King as any knight that is 
belonging to the court. If it be so, I pray God 
continue it, and also that ye should marry right nigh 
of the Queen's blood ; what she is we are not as 
certain, but if it be so that your land should come 
again by the reason of your marriage and to be set in 
rest, at the reverence of God forsake it not, if ye can 
find in your heart to love her, so that she be such one 
as ye can think to have issue by, or else by my troth, 
I had rather that ye never married in your life. 

Also, if your matter take not now to good effect, 
ye and all your friends may repent them that ye 
began your claim, without that ye have taken such 
a sure way as may be to your intent for many 
inconveniences that may fall thereof. God send you 
good speed in all your matters. 

Written at Mauteby, the day after St. Austin, in 
May, the eighteenth year of King Edward IV. 

By your Mother. 



58 SIR JOHN PASTON'S MONEY MATTERS 

LI. To the right worshipful Mistress Margaret 
Paston, be this delivered. 

(1479) 

Pleaseth it you to weet that I have been here at 
London a fortnight, whereof the first four days I was 
in such fear of the sickness, and also found my 
chamber and stuff not so clean as I deemed, which 
troubled me sore ; and as I told you at my departing, 
I was not well monied, for I had not past ten marks 
whereof I departed forty shillings to be delivered of 
my old bedfellow ; and then I rode beyond Dunstable 
and there spake with one of my chief witnesses which 
promised me to take labour, and to get me writings 
touching this matter between me and the Duke of 
Suffolk, and I rewarded him twenty shillings and then 
as I informed you, I paid five marks incontinent upon 
my coming here to repledge out my gown of velvet 
and other gear. And then I hoped to have borrowed 
some of Townshend, and he hath foodyd not forth 
ever since, and in effect I could have at the most and 
at the soonest yesterday twenty shillings, wherefore 
I beseech you to purvey me an hundred shillings, 
and also to write to Peacock, that he purvey me as 
much, an hundred shillings, which I suppose he hath 
gathered at Paston and other places by this time ; 
for without I have this ten pounds, as God help me, I 
fear I shall do but little good in no matter, nor yet I 
wote not how to come home but if I have it. 

This gear has troubled me so, that it hath made 
me more than half sick, as God help me. 

Written in haste with short advisement on the 
Friday next St. Simon and Jude in the nineteenth 
year of Edward IV. 

Let my brother John see this bill, for he knoweth 
more of the matter. 

John Paston, Knight. 



CHRISTMAS SPORTS AND PASTIMES 59 



LI I. To my right worshipful husband, 
» John Paston. 
(1484) 

Right worshipful husband, I recommend me unto 
you. Please it you to weet, that I sent your eldest 
son to my Lady Morley to have knowledge what 
sports were used in her house in Christmas next 
following after the decease of my lord, her husband. 
And she said that there were none disguisings, nor 
harpings, nor luting, nor singing nor none loud 
disports, but playing at the tables, and chess and 
cards. Such disports she gave her folks leave to play 
and none other. 

Your son did right well as ye shall hear after this. 
I sent your younger son to the Lady Stapleton, and 
she said according to my Lady Morley's saying in 
that, and as she had seen used in places of worship 
thereas she hath been. 

I pray you that ye will assure to you some man at 
Caister, to keep your buttery, for the man that ye 
left with me will not take upon him to breve daily as 
ye commanded. He saith he hath not used to give a 
reckoning neither of bread nor ale, till at the week's 
end, and he saith he wot well that he should not 
condeneth, and therefore I suppose he shall not abide, 
and I trow ye shall be fain to purvey another man for 
Symond, for ye are never the nearer a wise man for 
him. 

I am sorry that ye shall not at home be for 
Christmas. 

I pray you that ye will come as soon as ye may.' 
I shall think myself half a widow, because ye shall 
not be at home, etc. God have you in his keeping. 
Written on Christmas Even. 

By your servant and beadwoman 

Margery Paston. 



60 BEFORE BOSWORTH FIELD 



LIII. To my well-heloved friend John Pastoii, 
be this bill delivered in haste. 

(1485) 

Well-beloved friend, I commend me to you ; letting 
you to understand that the king's enemies be a-land, 
and that the king would have set forth as upon Mon- 
day, but only for our Lady-day ; but for certain he 
goeth forward as upon Tuesday, for a servant of mine 
brought to me the certainty. 

Wherefore I pray you that ye meet with me at 
Bury, for, by the grace of God, 1 purpose to lie at 
Bury as upon Tuesday night ; and that ye bring with 
you such company of tall men as ye may goodly make 
at my cost and charge, besides that which ye have 
promised the king ; and I pray you, ordain them 
jackets of my livery, and I shall content you at your 
meeting with me. 

Your lover, 

J. Norfolk. 



LIV. Unto John Paston, in haste. 

(Date uncertain) 

Master Paston, I pray that it may please you to 
leave your lodging for three or four days, till I may be 
purveyed of another, and I shall do as much to your 
pleasure ; for God's sake, say me not nay, and I pray 
you recommend me to my Lord Chamberlain. 

Your friend, 

Blizabeth. 



FROM JOHN PASTON 61 

LV. To Mistress Anne. 

(Date uncertain) 

Since it is so that I may not as oft as I would be 
there, as 1 might do my message myself, mine own fair 
Mistress Anne, I pray you to accept this bill for my 
messenger, to recommend me to you in my most faith- 
ful wise, as he that faincst of all other desireth to 
know of your welfare, which I pray God increase to 
your most pleasure. 

And, mistress, though so be that I as yet have 
given you but easy cause to remember me for lack of 
acquitation, yet I beseech you let me not be forgotten, 
when ye reckon up all your servants, to be set in the 
number with other. 

And I pray you, Mistress Anne, for that service 
that I owe you, that in as short time as ye goodly may 
that I might be ascertained of your intent, and of 
your best friends, in such matters as I have broken to 
you of ; which both your and mine right trusty friends 
John Lee, or else my mistress his wife, promised 
before you and me at our first and last being together, 
that as soon as they or either of them knew your 
intent, and your friends, that they should send me 
word, and if they so do I trust soon after to see you. 

And now farewell, mine own fair lady, and God 
give you good rest, for in faith I trow ye be in bed. 

Written in my way homeward, on Mary Magdalen's 
day at midnight. 

Your own, 

John Paston. 

Mistress Anne, I am proud that ye can read Eng- 
lish, wherefore I pray you acquaint you with this my 
lewd hand, for my purpose is that ye shall be more 
acquainted with it, or else it shall be against my will ; 
but yet and when ye have read this bill, 1 pray you 
burn it, or keep it secret to yourself, as my faithful 
trust is in you. 