Page Scan 11
§ §§ §§ $º - - TTo The R E A D E R. :=ri Seuery humane body lº \ w (deare Countreymen)how ; B3%) | wholeſome ſoeuer, is not- £, \º Sº I withſtanding ſubiest, or at leaſt naturally inclined to \ZS AV É §§ ſomeſorts ofdiſeaſes,or in- tº: - firmities : ſo is there no Common-wealth, or Body-politickel, how well gouerned, or peaceableſoeuer it bee-, that lackes the ownepopular errors, and naturally enclined corruptions: and therefore is it no wonder, al- though this our Countrey and Common-wealth, though peaceablel, though wealthy, though long flouriſhing in both, be amongſt thereſt, ſubleå to the owne maturall infirmities. Wee are of all Nations the people moſt louing and most reuerently obedient to our Prince , yet are wee (as time hath often borne witneſſe) too eaſie to be ſeduced to make Rebellion, rvpon very JA 3 flight










Page Scan 12
- To The Re Ape R. ſlight grounds. Our fortunate and oftprooned ºvalour inwarres abroad, our heartieandreue. rent obedience to our Princes at home-, hath bredrus a long,and a thrice happy peace : Our Peace hath bred wealth:...And Peace and wealth hath brought foorth a generall ſluggiſhne which . !. º all# o º: #. lights, and ſoft delicacies, the firſt Č. ofthe Jubuerſion of allgreat Monarchies, 0hrſ 'gif are become negligent and lazie-your Nobilitiel, and Gentrieprodigll, and ſolde to their priuate delights, Our Lawyers couetous, our Common- people prodigall and curious; and generally Jorts of people more carefullfortheir primatends, then for their mother the Common-wealth. . . . . Forremedie whereof; it is the Kingspart (as the proper'Phiffcian of his Politick-body) to purge it of all thoſe diſeaſes, by Medicines meete fortheſame: as by a certaine mille, and yetiuſt {uietneſſe, and preuent all ... .º. fion: by the example of his owne Perſon and (ourt, to make ºvs all aſhamed of ourſluggiſh delicaciº, and to ſtirrevºop to the praiſed gººfall houji exerciſes;and Mitialſº ; : \ . . . . ~ dones forme #: , to maintaine the Publicke - -•.---- --•**- -

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 13
To T H E R E A D E R. dowes of Warrel; As likewiſe by his, and his Courts moderateneſſe in Apparell, to make vs aſhamed of our prodigalitie-: By his quicke ad. monitions and carefull ouerſeeing of the Cleargie, towaken them ºvp againe, to be more diligent in their Offices: By theſharpetrial,andſevere pu- miſhment of the partiall, couetous and bribing Lawyers, to reforme their corruptions:..And ge. nerally by the example of his owne Perſon, and by the due execution of good Lawes, tortformeand aboliſh, piece and piece, theſe oldandeuillgroun- ded abuſes. For this will not bee Opus vnius diei,but as euery one of theſe diſeaſes, muſtfrom the King receiue the owne cure properfor it, ſo arethereſomeſorts of abuſes in Common-wealths, that though they be of/obaſe and contemptible a , condition, as they are too lowfor the Law to looke on, and toomeanefora King to interpone his au. thoritie, or bend his eye rvpon : yet are they core . ruptions, aſivellas the greateſt of them. So is an JAnt an Animalaſwell as an Elephant:ſois a , Wrenne Auis, aſvellas a Swanne, and ſo is a ſmall dint of the Toothake, a diſeaſe aſpellas the fearfull Plague is. Tut for theſe baſe ſorts of corruption in Common wealthes, not onely the King,

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 14
To T H E R E A D B R. King,0r any inferior Magiſtrate, but Quilibet ê populomay ſtrue to be a Phiftcian, by diſco. wering and impugning the error, and by perſºa- ding reformation thereof. Jºnd ſurely in my opinion, there cannot be a more baſe, and yet hurtfull, corruption in a Coun- trey,then is the rvilevſe (or rather abuſe) ofta. king Tobacco in this Kingdome, which hath mooued me,ſhortly to diſcouer the abuſes thereof in this following little Pamphlet. If anythinke it alight Argument,ſo is it but a toy that is beſtowed-vponit...And ſincethe Sub- ieśi is but of Smoke, Ithinke thefume of an idle braine, may ſeruefor a ſufficient battery againſt ſofumousandfeeble an enemy. If my groundsbe foundtrue,it is all I looke for; but if they cary the force offerſuaſion with them,it is all Ican wiſh, and more then I can expect. My onely care is, that you,mydearedountrey-men, may rightly con- ceiueeuen by this ſmalleft trifle, of the ſinceritie of my meaning in greater matters, neuer to . ſhare any paine,that maytendto the procuring of your weale andprojheritie. - Acoun-

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 15
%.º. §§§ - §§ § e-A Counterblaſte to . . Tobacco. ſºlº ris Hºpiſtºfºrº EEEIGº, Eºfº Hat the manifolde abuſes of this vile cuſtome of Tobaccota- king may the betterbecſpied, it is fit,that firſt you enter into conſideration both ofthe firſt Øº) originallthercof, and likewiſe Pº)Sº of the reaſons of the firſt en- try thereof into this Countrey. For certainely as ſuch cuſtomes, that haue their firſt inſtitution ei-. ther from a godly.neceſſary,orhonorable ground, and are firſt brought in, by the meanes of ſome worthy, vertuous, and great Perſonage, are cuer, and moſtiuſtly,holden in great &reuerenteſtina- tion and account, by alwiſºvertuous, abdtem- i. ſpirits. So ſhould itby the contrary, inſtly inga.gºcardiſgrace inta that ſort of cuſtomes, which having their original from baſeq9rruptiºn gº- *R, Raak; their firſt vºn B entry - t


Page Scan 16
JM counterblafle to Tobacco. entry into a Countrey, by an inconſiderate and childiſh affectation of Noueltie, as is the tree caſe of the firſt inucntion of Tobacco taking, and of the firſt entry thercofamong vs. For T. being a cómon herbe,which though vnder duers names) growes almoſt euery where, was firſt found out by ſomc of the barbarous Indians, to be a Preſerua- tiue, or Antidot againſt the Pockes, a filthy diſ- eaſe, whereunto theſe barbarous people arc (as all men know) very much ſubſeét, what through the vncleanly and aduſt conſtitution of their bodies, and what through the intemperate heate of their Climat: ſo that as from them was firſt broughtin- to Chriſtendome, that moſt deteſtable diſeaſe, ſo from them likewiſe was brought this vſe of Tobacco, as a ſtinking andvnſauorie Antidot, for ſo corrup- ted and execrable a Maladie, the ſtinking Suffumi- gation whereof they yet vſe againſt that diſeaſe, ...'s ſo one canker or venime to eate out ano- Cre - And now good Countrey men, let vs (I pray you)conſider,what honour or policie can mooue vs to imitate the barbarous and beaſtly maners of the wilde, godleſſe, and ſlauiſh Indians, eſpecially in ſo vile and ſtinking a cuſtome? Shall wee that diſdaine to imitate i. maners of our neighbour France (having the ſtileofthe firſt Chriſtian King- dom) and that cannot endurethe ſpirit of the Spa- niards(their Kingbeingnow comparable in large- nés of Dominions,to º: of Turkie) Shallwee, Iſay, that 'ſolongtiuill and . . . . a wealthy

Page Scan 17
J4 counterblafie to Tobacco. , and ſuch toyes, to go wealthy in Peace,famousandinuincible in Warre, fortunate in both, we that haue bene euer able to aide any of our fighbours (but neuer deafcd any of their eares with any of our ſupplications for aſ: ſiſtance) ſhall we, l ſay, without bluſhing, abaſe our ſºlues ſofarre, as to imitate theſe beaſtly Indi- ams,ſlaues to the Spaniards, refuſe to the world, and as yet aliens from the holy Couenant of God? Why doe we not as well imitate them in walking naked as they doe? in ſº glaſſes, feathers, de and precious ſtones, as they do? yeawhy do we not denie God and adore the Deuill,asthey doe? - Now to the corrupted baſeneſſe of the firſt vſe of this Tobacco, doeth very well agree the fooliſh and groundleſſe firſt entry thereof into this King- dome. It is not ſo long ſince the firſt entry of this abuſe amongſt vs here, as this preſent age cannot yet very well remember,both the firſt Author,and the forme of the firſt introduction of it amongſt vs. It was neither brought in by King, great Con- querour, nor learned Dočtor of Phiſicke. With thereportofagreatdiſcouery for a Con- queſt,ſome two or three Sauage mé,were brought in,together with this Sauage cuſtome. But the pi- tie is, the poore wilde barbarous men died, but that vile barbarous cuſtome is yet aliue, yearn freſh vigor: ſo as it ſeemes a miracle to me, how a cuſtome ſpringing from ſo vile a ground, and brought in by a father ſo generally hated, ſhould be welcomed vpon ſo ſlender a warrant. For if , B 2 they

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 18
A counterbaile to Tobacco. they that firſt put it in practiſe heere, had remem. bred for what reſpect it was vſed by them from whence it came, I am ſure they wouldhaue bene loath, to haue taken ſofarre the imputation of that diſeaſe vpon them as they did, by vſing the cure thereof. For Sana non eſt opuſ Medico, and coun- terpoiſons are neuer vicd, but where Poyſon is thought to precede. ... But ſtºce it is true, that diuers cuſtomes ſlightly ºf grounded, and with no better warrant entred in a , Commonwealth.mayyet in the vſeofthem there- . , ºr after, proouc both neceſſary and profitable; it is ‘’, therefore next to be examined, if there be not a full Sympathic and true Proportion, betweene the baſe groundard fooliſh entrie, and the loathſome and hurtfull vſe ofthis ſtinking Antidote. ... I am now thereforeheartily to pray you to con- ſider, firſt vpon what falſe and errorieous grounds youhaue firſtbuilt the generall goodliking there- of; and next, whatſinnes towards God, and foo- liſh vanities before the world you commit, in the deteſtable vſe of it. . . . . . . . , ... Asfortheſedeceitfullgrounds, that haue ſpeci- ally moouedyou to takeagood andgreat conceit thereof, Iſhallconſentmyſelfe to examine here ontly fouredfthe principals of them; twofounded vpon the Theoricke of a deceiueable apparance of Reaſon, and two of them vpon the miſtaken Braćtickeof generall Experiohesis: "..., , ; ; {{Firſt, itisholight by you aſure Aphoriſine in the Phyſickes, ihatshebtainesofallmen, becing - - 9 naturally

Page Scan 19
JA counterbliſle to Tobacco. - naturally colde and wet, all dry and hote things ſhould be good for them; of which nature this ſtin-. king ſuffumigation is, and therefore of good vſe to them. Of this Argument, both the Propoſition and Aſſumption are falſe, and ſo the Concluſion cannot but be voyd of itſelfe. For as to the Pro- poſition, That becauſe the braines are colde and moiſt, therefore things that are hotcand drie are beſt for them, it is an inept conſequence: For man beeing compounded of the foure Complexions, . (whoſe fathers are the ſoure Elements) although there be a mixture of themall in all the parts of his body, yet muſt the diuers parts of our Microcoſme or little world within our ſelues, be diuctſly more inclined, ſome to one, ſome to another complexi- on,according to the diuerſitie of their vſes, that of theſe diſcords a perfeót harmonie may bee made vp for the maintenance of the whole body. The application then of a thing of a contrary nature, to any of theſe parts, is to interrupt them of their duefunétion, and by conſequencehurtfull to the health of the whole body. As if a man, be- cauſe the Liuer is hote (as the fountaine of blood) and as it were anouen to the ſtomacke,would ther- fore apply and weare cloſe vpon his Liuer and ſto- macke a cake of lead; he might within a very ſhort time (I hope) be ſuſteined very good cheape at an Ordinarie, beſide the cleering of his conſcience from that deadly ſinne of glutronie. And as if, be- cauſethe Heart is full of vitallſpirits, and in per- petuallmotion, a man would thereforelay aheauy o B 3 - pound

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 20
JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. poundſtone on his breaſt, for ſtaying and holding downe that wanton palpitation,ldoubt not but his breaſt would bee more bruiſed with the weight thereof, then the heart would be comforted with ſuch a diſagreeable & contrarious cure.And euen ſoisit with the Braines. For if a man, becauſe the Braines are cold and humide, would therefore vſe inwardly by ſmells, or outwardly by application, things of hot and drie qualitie, all the gaine that he could make thereof would onely be to put himſelfe in agreat forwardneſſe for running mad, by ouer- watching himſelfe, the coldneſſe and moiſtneſſe of our braine beeing the onely ordinarie meanes that procure our ſleepe and reſt. Indeed I doe not denie,but when it falls out that any of theſe, or an part ofour bodie growes to be diſtempered,and to tend to an extremitiebeyond the compaſſe of Na- tures temperate mixture, that in that caſe cures of contrary qualities, to the intemperate inclination of that part,being wiſely prepared and diſcreetcly miniſtred, maybe both łºś. and helpefull for ſtrengthning and aſſiſting Nature in the expulſion ofher enemies: for this is the true definition of all profitable Phyſicke. ' v. - But firſt theſe Cures ought not to beevſed, but where there is neede of them,the contrarie where- af, is daily praśliſed in this generall vſe of Tobacco by all ſorts and complexions of people, Andnext, deny the Minor ofthisargument,as Ihaus already ſaid, in regard that this Tobasse, is not ſimplyoſadry&hotgualitiesbuttatherhatha - - - certaine

Page Scan 21
JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. certaine venemous facultie ioyned with the heate thereof, which makes ithauean Antipathicagainſt nature, as by the hatefull ſmell thereof doethwell appeare. For the Noſe being the proper Organ and conuoy of the ſenſe of ...; to the braines, which are the onely fountaine of that ſenſe, doeth euer ſerue vs for an infallible witneſſe,whether that Odour which we ſmell, be healthfull or hurtfull to the braine, (except when it ſals out that the ſenſe it ſelfe is corrupted and abuſed through ſome infir- mitie, and diſtemper in the braine.) And that the ſuffumigation thereof cannot haue a drying quali- tie, it needes no further probation, then that it is a ſmoake, all ſmoake and vapour, being of it ſelfe humide,as drawingneere to the nature oftheayre, and eaſie to be reſolued againe into water, where- of there needes no other proofe but the Meteors, which being bred of nothing elſe but of the va. pours and exhalations ſucked vp by the Sunne out of the earth, the Sea, andwaters, yet are the ſame ſmoakie vapours turned, and transformed into Raynes,Snowes,Deawes,hoare Froſtes, and ſuch like waterie Meteors, as by the contrarie the ray- nie cloudes are often transformed and euaporated in bluſtering winds. - - . . The ſecond Argument grounded on a ſhow of reaſon is, Thatthis filthie ſmoake, aſ well through the heatandſtrength thereofasby anaturall force and qualitie, isable and fittopurgeboth thehead and ſtomackedfRhewmes and diſtillations, as ex- perience teacheth, by the ſpitting and aucyding . J - fleame,

Page Scan 22
J4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. fleame, immediatly after the taking of it. Butthe fallacie of this Argument may caſily appeare, by my late preccding deſcription of the Meteors. For euen as the ſmoakie vapours ſucked vp by the Sunne, and ſtaied in the loweſt and colde Region ofthe ayre, are there contračted into cloudes, and turned into raine and ſuch other watery Mcteors: So this ſtinking ſmoake being ſucked vp by the Noſe, and impriſoned in the colde and moyſt braines, is by their colde and wett facultie, tur- ned and caſt foorth againe in waterie diſtillations, and ſoare you made free and purged of nothing, but that wherewith you wilfuſly burdened your ſelues: and therefore are you no wiſer in taking Tobacco for purgingyou of diſtillations,then if for preuenting the Cholike you would take all kinde of windie meates and drinkes, and for preuenting of the Stone, you would take all kinde of meates and drinkes that would breede grauell in the Kid- neyes, and then when you were forced to auoyde much windcout of your ſtomacke,and much gra- uell in your Vrine, that youſhould attribute the thankethereof to ſuch nouriſhments asbred thoſe withinyou; that behoued either to be expelled by the force of Nature, or you to haue burſt at the *::::i. º: - * : ... As for the other two reaſons founded vpon ex- perience the firſtofviiichis, Thatthewholepec. ple would not haug taken ſogenerallagoodliking thereofiftheyhadnot by experiencefoundisvº is ſolºissandsºeiſoúliº Făranº : t .2% there:

Page Scan 23
JA counterblaſte to Tobacco. thereunto, how eaſily the mindes of any people, wherewith God hath repleniſhed this world,may be drawen to the fooliſh affectation of any nouel- tie, Ileaue it to the diſcreet iudgenient of any man that is reaſonable. - Doe we not dayly ſee, that a man can no ſooner bring oiler from beyond the Seas any new forme of apparrell, but that hee cannot bee thought a manof ſpirit, that would not preſently imitate the ſame? And ſo from hand to hand it ſpreades, till it be practiſed by all, not for any commoditie that is in it,but only becauſe it is come to be the faſhion. . For ſuch is the force of that naturall Selfe-loue in euery one of vs, and ſuch is the corruption of en- uie bred in the breſt of eucryone, as we cannot be contentvnleſſe weimitate euerything that our fel- lowes doe, and ſo prooue our ſclues capable of euerything whereof they are capable, like Apes, counterfeiting the maners ofcthers, to our owne deſtrućtion. Forſet one or two ofthe greateſt Ma- ſters of Mathematickes in any of the two famous Vniuerſities,but conſtantly affirmeany cleare day, that they ſee ſome ſtrange apparition in the skies: they will Iwarrantyoube ſecondedbythe greateſt part of the Students in that profeſſion: Soloath will they be; to bee thought inferiour to their fel- lowes, either indepth of knowledge or ſharpncſſe of ſight: And therefore the generallgood liking and imbracing of this fooliſhcuſtome, docth but onely proceede from that affectation of noueltic, and popularerrour, *:: Ihaucalready ſiFº - ... IIC t – `A.


Page Scan 24
JAſcounterblaſte to Tobacco. The other argument drawen from a miſł:ken experience, is but the more particular probation of this generall, becauſe it is alleaged to be found trueby proofe, that by the taking of Tobacco diuers and very many doe . thcmfclues curcd of di- uers diſeaſes, as on the other part, no maneuer re- ceiued harme thereby. In this argument there is firſt a great miſtaking, and next a monſtrous ab- ſurditie. For is it not a very great miſtaking,to take Non cauſamprocauſa,as they ſay in the Logicks?be- cauſe peraduenture when a ſicke manhath had his diſeaſe atthe height,heehath at that inſtant taken Tobacco, and afterward his diſeaſe taking the natu- rall courſe ofdeclining, and conſequently the pati- ent of recouering his health, O then #: Tobacco forſooth, was the worker of that miracle. Beſide that,it is a thing well knowen to all Phiſicians,that the apprehenſion and conceit ofthe patient, hath bywakening and vniting the vitallſpirits, and ſo ſtrengthening nature, agreat power and vertue, to curediuers diſeaſes Foraneuident proofe of miſ: takingin the likecaſe, I prayyou what fooliſhboy, whatſilliewench, whatoldedoting wiſe, or igno- rant countrey clowne, is not a Phiſician for the toothach,for the cholidae,&diuers ſuch common diſeaſes?Yea, will noteuery manyou meetewih- al,teachyouaſundry curefortheſame,and ſweare by that meane either himſelfe, or ſome of his nee- reſt kinſmen and friends was cured? And yet I *::::::: fooliſhastobeleeue them. And altheſetoyesdoonly proceed from themiſtaking Neº - - - - - !

Page Scan 25
JA counterblaſte to Tobacco. Non cauſar, pro cauſa, as Ihaue already ſayd, and ſo if a man chance to recouerone of any diſeaſe,after he hath taken Tobacco, that muſthauctile thankes of all But by the contrary, if a man ſmoke himſelfe to death with it (and many haue done) Othen ſome other diſeaſe muſt beare the blame for that fault. So doe oldeharlots thanke their harlotrie for their many yeeres, that cuſtome being health- full (ſay they) adpurgandos Renes, but neuerhaue mindehow many die of the Pockcs in the flower of their youth. And ſo doe olde drunkards thinke . they prolong their dayes, by their ſwinelike diet, but neuer remember howe many die drowned in drinke before they behalfe olde.: And what greater abſurditiecantherebee,then to ſay that one cure ſhall ſerue for diuers, nay,con- trarious ſortes of diſeaſes? It is an vndoubted ground among all Phiſicians, that there is almoſt no ſort either of nouriſhment or medicine, that hath not ſomethingin it diſagreeable to ſome part of mans bodie, becauſe, as I haue already ſayd, the nature ofthe temperatureofeuerypart, is ſo diffe- rent from another, that accordingtothe olde pro- uerbe,That which is good for the head, iseuillfor the necke and the ſhoulders. For euenas a ſtron enemie,thatinuades a towne or fortreſſe,althou # in his ſiege thereof, he doebelaie and compaſſe it roundabout yet he makes his breach and entrie, at ſome one or few ſpeciallparts thereof, which hee hathtried and found to bee weakeſtand leaſtable toreſiſt; ſo ſickeneſſe dothmakeherparticular aſ C 2 ſault

Page Scan 26
JA counterlliſie to Tobacco. ſault, vpon ſuch part or parts of our bodie, as are weakcſtand eaſieſt to be ouercome by that ſort of diſeaſe, which then doth aſſailevs, although all the reſt of the body by Sympathic feele itſelfe,to be as it were belaied, and beſieged by the afflićtion of that ſpeciall part, the griefe and ſmart thercoſ be- ing by the ſcnce offeeling diſperſed through all the reſt of our members. And therefore the skilfull Phiſician preſſes by ſuch cures to purge&ſtreng- then that part which is afflićted, as are onely fit for that ſort of diſeaſe, and doe beſt agree with the na- ture of that infirme part; which being abuſed to a diſeaſe of another nature,would prooue as hurtfull for the one,as helpfull for the othcr. Yea,not on- ly will a skilfull and warie Phiſician bec carefull to vſe no cure but that which is fit for that ſort of diſ. eaſe,but he wil alſo conſider all other circliſtances, and make the remedies ſutable thereunto: as the temperature of the climewhere the Patient is, the conſtitution of the Planets,the time of the Moone, the ſeaſon oftheyere,the age & complexion of the Patient,&the preſent ſtate of his body, in ſtrength or weakeneſſe. Forone cure muſt noteuerbevſed for the ſelfe-ſame diſeaſe, but according to the varying of any ofthe foreſaid circumſtances, that ſort of remedie muſtbevſed which is fitteſt for the ſame. Whearby the contrarie in this caſe,ſuch is the miraculous omnipotencie of our ſtrong taſted Tobacco,as it curesall ſorts of diſeaſes(which neuer any drugge could dobefore) in all perſons,andat alltimes. It curesall maner of diſtillations, either 1In

Page Scan 27
JA counterblafle to Tobacco. in the head or ſtomacke (if you belceuc their Axi. omes) although in very deede it doeboth corrupt the braine, and by cauſing ouer quicke diſgeſtion, fill the ſtomacke full of crudities. It cures thc Gowt in the feet,and (which is miraculous)in that very inſtant when the ſmoke thereof,aslight, flies vp into the head,the vertuethereof, as heauie, runs downe to the little toe It helpes all ſorts of Agues. It makes a man ſober that was drunke. It refreſhes a weary man, and yet makesaman hungry. Being taken when they goeto bed, it makes one ſleepe ſoundly, and yet being taken when a man isſleepie and drowſie, it will, as they ſay, awake his braine, and quicken his vinderſtanding. As for curing of the Pockes, itſerues for that vſe but among the pockie Indian ſlaues. Here in Englanditis refined, and will not deigne to cure heere any other then cleanly and gentlemanly diſeaſes. Oomnipotent power of Tobacco And if it could by the ſmoke thereof chace out deuils, as the ſmoke of Tobias fiſh did(which I am ſure could ſmelno ſtronglier) it would ſerue for a precious Relicke, both for the ſuperſtitions Prieſts, and the inſolent Puritanes, to caſt out deuils withall. Admitting then, and not confeſſing that the vſe thereof were healthfull for ſome ſortes of diſeaſes; ſhould it bevſed for all ſickneſſes?ſhould it be vſed by allmen?ſhould it bevſedatal times?yeaſhould it bevſed by able yong,ſtronghealthful men? Me- dicine hath that vertue,that it neuerleaueth a man in that ſtate wherinitfindeth him: it makes a ſicke ' ' ' '. C 3 II].3ſl

Page Scan 28
--- --- JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. man whole, but a whole man ſicke. Andas Medi. cine helpes nature being takcn at times of neceſſi. * tie, ſo being cuer and continually vſed, it doth but - weaken,wearie, and weare nature. What ſpeake I of Medicine? Nay let a man euery houre of the day, or as oft as many in this countrey vſe to take Tobacco, let a man Iſay, but takeasoft the beſt ſorts of nouriſhments in mcatc and drinke that can bee deuiſed, hee ſhall with the continuall vſe thereof weaken both his head and his ſtomacke: all his members ſhall become feeble, his ſpirits dull, and in the end,as a drouſielaziebelly-god,he ſhalleua- niſhina Lethargie. - And from this weakeneſſe it proceeds, that ma- ny in this kingdomchaue had ſuch a continuallvſe oftaking this vnſauorieſmoke,as now they are not able to forbeare the ſame, no more then an olde drunkard can abide to belong ſober, withoutfal- ling into an vncurable weakeneſſe and euill conſti- tution: for their continuall cuſtome hath made to them,habitum,alterånataram:ſo to thoſe that from their birthhaue bene continually nouriſhed vpon poiſon and thingsvenemous, wholeſome meates are oncly poiſonable. \ . Thushāuingas Itruſte,ſufficiently anſwered the moſtprincipallarguments that arevſed in defence of thisvile cuſtome, it reſtsonely to informeyou whatſinnes and vanities you commit in the filthie abuſe thereof. Firſt, are you not guiltie of ſinnefull andſhamefullluſt? (forluftmaybee as wellinany of the ſenſes as in feeling) that althoughyoubce troubled

Page Scan 29
-A corºntºr!! iſle to Tºbicco. troubled with to ºf 3:c, but in perfect heal.h, yet can yo; nº it.c. bc in eity at an Ordinaric, nor lat- citºus in the Secwes, if you lackc Tobacco to pro- uoke yoºr appetite to any of thoſe forts of recreaſi- on, utting after it as the children of Iſrael did in the wildcrucile after Quailes? Secondly it is, as you vſe or rather abuſe it, a branche of thc ſinne of drun- Arnneſſe, which is the roote of all ſinnes: for as the onely delight that di unkards take in Wine is in the ſtrength of the taſte, & the force of the fume there- of that mounts vp to the braine: for no drunkards loue any weake, or ſweete drinke: ſo are not thoſe (Imeane the ſtrong heate and the fumc) the onely qualities that make Tobaccoſo dele&table to all the louers of it? And as no man likes ſtrong headic drinke thc firſt day (becauſe memorpenteſt turpiń. ſimus) but by cuſtome is piece and piece allured, while in the ende, a drunkard willhaue as great a thirſt to bee drunke, as a ſober man to quench his thirſt with a draught when heehath need of it. So is not this the very caſe of all the great takers of Tobacco Pwhich therefore they themſelues do attri- bute to a bewitching qualitiein it.Thirdly,is it not the greateſt ſinne of all, that you the people of all ſortes of this Kingdome, who are created and or- deined by God to beſtowe bothyour perſons and goods for the maintenance both of the honour and ſafetie of your King and Common-wealth, ſhould diſableyourſeluesinboth?Inyourperſons hauing by this continuallvile cuſtome brought your ſeluesto this ſhamefullimbecilitic, that you 2IC

Page Scan 30
A counterblaſte to Tobacco. arc notable to ride or walke the iourney of a Iewes Sabboth, but you muſt haucarcekiccole brought you from the next poore houſe to kindle your To- bacco with? whereas he cannot be thought able for any ſeruice in the warres, that cannot cndure of tentimes the want of mcate, drinke, and ſleepe, much more then muſt hee cndure the want of To- bacco. In the timesofthemany gloriousandvićto- rious battailes fought by this Nation,there was no word of Tobacco; but now if it werc time of warres, and that you were to make ſome ſudden Cauakado vpon your enemies, if any of you ſhould ſeeke lei- ſure to ſtay behinde his fellowe for taking of To- bacco, for my part I ſhould neuer bee ſoric for any euill chance that might befall him. To take a cu- ſtome in anything that cannot bee left againe, is moſt harmefull to the people of any land. Mollicies and delicacie were the wracke and ouerthrow, firſt ofthe Perſian, and next of the Romane Empire. And this very cuſtome oftaking Tobacco (whereof our preſent purpoſe is) is euen at this day accoun- +ed ſo effeminate among the Indians themſelues, as in the market they will offer no price for a ſlaue to be ſold, whomethey finde to be a great Tobacco taker. - Now how you are by this cuſtome diſabled in yourgoods, let the Gentry of this land beare wit- neſe, ſome of them beſtowing three, ſome foure hundred pounds a yeerevpon this precious ſtinke, which I am ſure might be beſtowed vpon many farrebetter vſes, Ireadindeedcofaknauiſh Cour- º "- ticr;

Page Scan 31
-4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. tier, who for abuſing the fauourof the Emperour Udlexander Seweru his Maſter takingbribes to intercede, for ſundry perſons in his Maſters eare, ..(for whom he neuer once opened his mouth)was iuſtly choked with ſmoke, with this doome, Fame erest,4* famsm, vendidit: but of ſo many ſmoke- {j as are at this preſent in this kingdome, I neuer readnor heard. And for the vanities committed in this filthie cuſtome,isit not both great vanitieandvncleane- neſſe, that at the table,a placeofreſpect, of clean- lineſſe, of modeſtie, men ſhould not be aſhamed, to ſit toſſing of Tobacco pipes, and puffing of the ſmoke of Tobaccoone to another, makingthefilthy ſmoke and ſtinke thereof, to exhale athwart the diſhes, and infect the aire, when very often, men that abhorre it are at their repaſt? Surely Smoke becomes akitchin far better thena Dining cham- ber, and yet it makes a kitchin alſo oftentimes in the inward parts of men, ſoiling and infeaing them, withan vnétuousandoily kinde of Soote,as hathbene found in ſome great Tobacco takers,that after their death were opened. And not onely meatetime,but no other timenoraćtion is exemp- ted from the publike vſe of this vnciuill tricke: ſo as if the wines of Diepe liſt to conteſt with this Nation for good maners, their worſt maners would in all reaſon be found at leaſt not ſo diſho- neſt (as ours are) in this point. The publike vſe whereof, at all times,andinallplaces,hath now ſo farrepreuailed, as diuers men very ſound both in D iudgement,

Page Scan 32
.4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. iudgement,and complexion,hauebeneatlaſt ſor- ced to take it alſo without deſire, partly becauſe they were aſhamed to ſecme ſingular,(like the two Philoſophers that were forced to duck themſelugs in that raine water, and ſo become foolesaſwell as the reſt of the people) and partly,to be as one that was content to eate Garlicke (which hee did not loue) that he might not be troubled with the ſmell of it, in ſhe breath of his fellowes. And is it not a great vanitie,that a man cannot heartily welcome his friend now, but ſtraight they muſt bee in hand with Tobaceof Noit is become in place of a cure,a point of goodfellowſhip, and he that will refuſe to take a pipe of Tobacco among his fellowes, (though by his owne election he would rather feele the ſauour of a Sinke) is accounted peeuiſh and no good company, euen as they doe with §. in the cold Eaſterne Countries. Yeathe Miſtreſſe cannot in a more manerly kinde, enter- taine her ſeruant, then by giuing him out of her faire hand a pipe of Tobacco. But herein is not onely a great vanitie, but a great contempt of Gods good giftes, that the ſweeteneſſe of mans breath, being a good gift of God, ſhould bewil- fully corrupted by this flinking ſmoke, wherein I muſt confeſſe, it hath too ſtrong a vertue: and ſo that which is an ornament of nature, and can nei- ther by any artifice be at the firſt acquired, nor oncelóſt,berecouered againe,ſhall j Core rupted with an incurable ſtinke, which vile qua- liticisa; directly contrary to that wrong opinion * … ." . º which

Page Scan 33
JA counterblafie to Tobacco. which is holden of the wholeſomneſſe thereof, as the venime of Futrifaction is contrary to the ver- tue Preſcruatiue. Morcouer,which is a great iniquitie,and againſt all humanitie, thchusband ſhall not bee aſhained, to reduce thereby his delicate, wholeſome, and cleane complexioned wife, to that extremitic,that cither ſhee inuſt alſo corrupt her ſweete breath therewith, or elſe reſolue to liue in a perpetuall ſtinking torment. , Haucyou not reaſon then to bee aſhaned, and to forbeare this filthie noucltie, ſo baſely groun- ded, ſo fooliſhly receiued,and ſo groſſely miſtaken in the right vſe thereof.” In your abuſe thereofſin- ning againſt God, harming your ſelues both in perſons and goods, and raking alſo thereby the markes and notes of vanitie vpon you; by the cu- ſtome thereof making your ſelues to be wondered at by all forraine ciuilNations,and by all ſtrangers that come amongyou, to be ſcorned and contem- ned. A cuſtome lothſome to the eye, hatefull to the Noſe, harmefull to the braine, daungerousto the Lungs,and in the blackeſtinking fume there- of, neereſt reſembling the horrible Sti- gian ſmoke of the pit that is bottomeleſſe.