A Psalme of thanksgiving, to be sung by
the Children of Christs Hospitall, on Munday in the Easter
holy dayes, at Saint Mary Spittle, for their Founders and
Benefactors. Anno Domini. 1610.
REgard O Lord from heaven above, accept the hartie prayse, which
Children render for the love, thou shewest to them alwayes.

These two lines are
to be sung by one or
two of the Children,
and then repeated by
the people and all the
Children.

THe goodnes of the Lord is seene, in all that he hath made, his mercy tis in all extreames
that sends his creatures aide. No worme so small, no wight so poore, but he preserveth still,
the sicke he heales, the weake sustaines, and hungry soule doth fill. Wee Orphants poore like mercy found,
when meanes and friends were scant, our gracious God a Prince did move, to slake and ease our want.

     Regard O Lord, etc.

The ground-worke of our good thus laid, God raisd us Patrons deere
Whose liberall hands did stil provide, to rid our hearts from feare.
You Cittizens those patrons are, by you we Orphants live,
Foode, rayment, learning, all we want, to us you largely give.
Blesse their endeavours Lord we pray; encrease likewise their store,
That those in plenty may abound, which helpe to feed the poore.
     Regard O Lord, etc.

O Lord upon our Soveraigne King, powre downe thy heavenly grace
Preserve his Queene, defend the Prince, blesse all his royall race.
Plant wisedome in his Counsellours, graunt to his Nobles might,
Thy church maintain, thy pastors save, that they may teach aright.
On Citty, Mayor, and Aldermen. Lord let thy mercy fall,
By whome our states are thus relieved, and wee releast from thrall.
     Regard O Lord etc.


CHildren kept in Christes Hospitall at this present 630
Children put foorth Apprentises, and dead this yeare out of
Christes hospitall. 54
There hath bene cured this yeare past in Saint Bartholmews Hospi-
tall of Souldiers and other diseased people. 602
There is in the said Hospitall under cure at this present. 253
There hath bene cured this yeare past in Saint Thomas Hospitall of
Souldiers and other diseased people. 812
There is in the said Hospitall under cure at this present 166
Toward the which godly & charitable foundation, King
Henry the eight, & King Edward the sixt, were most
gratious founders and liberall bennefactors.
A Report for Bridewell.
THere hath bene brought to the Hospital of Bride-
wel within the space of one yeare last past, of wan-
dring souldiers and other vagrant people, which have
bene passed thence into their native countries by Pas-
ports, according to the lawe in that case provided,
to the number of 1697. of whome many have bene
chargeable to the said Hospitall in their dyet, for
the time of their being in the same: some more,
some lesse, as they might thence be conveniently re-
moved, besides other helps there ministred unto ma-
ny of them, as cause required: viz. in Hose, Shooes,
Shirtes, bands, money and such like, which cannot
be avoyded by reason of their misery, nor they thence
passed without charge to the said Hospitall, in respect
they are to be examined, and considered of, to what
country to be transported. Also there is in the said ho-
spitall maintained and kept in Arts and occupations,
and other servile workes and labours, at the charges
of the said Hospitall, of men, women, and children, to
the number of 130. persons, whereof 88, and upwards
are poore boyes taken out of divers Parishes and
streetes of this Citty, and now bound Apprentises
in the said Hospital to be made Freemen of this City
at the end of their severall Termes. T.S.
Printed at London by E. Allde for W. Barley dwelling in Gracious street. 1610.
Cum Privilegio.