A New-yeeres-gift for the Pope.
Come see the difference plainly decided, betweene Truth and Falshood
Not all the Popes Trinkets, which heere are brought forth,
Can ballance the Bible for weight, and true worth:
Your Bells, Beads and Crosses, you see will not doo't,
Or pull downe your Scale, with the Divell to boot.
To the Tune of, Thomas, you cannot, etc.


ALl you that desirous are to behold
     the difference twixt falshood and faith,
Marke well this Emblem, one piece of pure gold,
     a Cart-load of false Coyne outwayeth,
Then wisely consider and beare in your mind,
Though Sathans Instruments true faith to blind,
A thousand devises dayly doe find;
     Yet all is in vaine, they cannot, they cannot,
     Yet all is in vaine they cannot.

The [diff]erence twixt Papist and Protestant here,
     yo[u'l] [ha]ve in a moment debated,
The [one] loves the Gospell that shineth still cleare,
     the other is more subtile-pated,
He will not be ruld by the Scriptures large scope,
But trusts in Traditions deriv'd from the Pope,
By which to be sav'd he doth constantly hope:
     Fond fooles y' are deceived, you cannot, etc.

True Justice, 'gainst whom no falshood prevailes,
     the case for both Parties decideth
[And] here she doth hold up her unpartiall Scales;
     no fictions nor lyes she abideth:
The Pope like a Martialist hardy and stout,
[Co]mes marching in pompe with all his brave rout,
[To] win by his multitude he makes no doubt:
     but alas father Pope you cannot, etc.

Thus are these two opposites come to the place,
     where truth must be proved by tryall,
The Pope thinks with greatnesse to carry the grace,
     but Justice hath eyes to descry all:
The Scales are made even, the Bible's in one,
Which is the true meanes of Salvation alone,
They striving to passe it, doe strive till they grone;
     Yet all is in vaine, they cannot, etc.

The Pope feeling he must be tride by the Bible,
     did seeke to orecome it by might,
He tride by all meanes that for him was possible;
     but all he could bring was too light:
Their Masses and Dirges, with such superstitions,
Decrees and Decretals, with other Traditions,
The golden Legend with late new additions:
     Yet all is in vaine, they cannot, etc.

Thus stil the pure Gospell gainst falshood prevailes,
     which when the proud Prelate did see,
A Cart-load of Trinkets he puts in the Scales,
     and thrust it as full as might be,
With great wooden Crosses and many great babies,
The Pictures and Saints of a bevy of Ladies,
Who dayly are worshipped by these grand Rabbies:
     Yet still father Pope you cannot, etc.
Yet still father Pope [you cannot, etc.]

