Page Scan 11
§ §§ §§ $º - - TTo The R E A D E R. :=ri Savoury humane body lº \ w (dear Countrymen)how ; B3%) | wholesome soever, is not- £, \º Sº I withstanding subject, or at least naturally inclined to \SS AV É §§ ſomeſorts ofdiſeaſes,or in- tº: - firmities : so is there no Common-wealth, or Body-politickel, how well governed, or peaceableſoeuer it bee-, that lacks the ownepopular errors, and naturally inclined corruptions: and therefore is it no wonder, al- though this our Country and Common-wealth, though peaceablel, though wealthy, though long flourishing in both, be amongst thereſt, ſubleå to the own maturall infirmities. Wee are of all Nations the people most loving and most reverently obedient to our Prince , yet are wee (as time hath often borne witness) too easy to be seduced to make Rebellion, rvpon very JA 3 flight










Page Scan 12
- To The Re Ape R. slight grounds. Our fortunate and oftprooned ºvalour inwarres abroad, our heartieandreue. rent obedience to our Princes at home, hath bredrus a long,and a thrice happy peace : Our Peace hath bred wealth:...And Peace and wealth hath brought forth a general ſluggiſhne which . !. º all# o º: #. lights, and soft delicacies, the first Č. ofthe Jubuerſion of allgreat Monarchies, 0hrſ 'gif are become negligent and lizzie-your Nobilitiel, and Gentrieprodigll, and sold to their private delights, Our Lawyers covetous, our Common- people prodigal and curious; and generally Jorts of people more carefullfortheir primatends, then for their mother the Common-wealth. . . . . Forremedie whereof; it is the Kingspart (as the proper'Phiffcian of his Politick-body) to purge it of all those diseases, by Medicines meet fortheſame: as by a certain mill, and yetiuſt {uietneſſe, and prevent all ... .º. fion: by the example of his own Person and (ort, to make ºvs all ashamed of ourſluggiſh delicaciº, and to ſtirrevºop to the praised gººfall houji exercises;and Mitialſº ; : \ . . . . ~ dones form #: , to maintain the Public - -•.---- --•**- -

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 13
To T H E R E A D E R. dowes of Warrel; As likewise by his, and his Courts moderateneſſe in Apparel, to make us ashamed of our prodigality: By his quick ad. monitions and careful overseeing of the Clergy, towaken them ºvp again, to be more diligent in their Offices: By theſharpetrial,andſevere pu- miſhment of the partial, covetous and bribing Lawyers, to reform their corruptions:..And ge. nerally by the example of his own Person, and by the due execution of good Laws, tortformeand abolish, piece and piece, these oldandeuillgroun- ded abuses. For this will not bee Opus vnius diei,but as every one of these diseases, muſtfrom the King receive the own cure properfor it, so arethereſomeſorts of abuses in Commonwealths, that though they be of/obese and contemptible a , condition, as they are too lowfor the Law to look on, and toomeanefora King to interpone his au. thoritie, or bend his eye rvpon : yet are they core . ruptions, aſivellas the greatest of them. So is an JAnt an Animalaſwell as an Elephant:ſois a , Wren Auis, aſvellas a Swan, and so is a small dint of the Toothache, a disease aſpellas the fearful Plague is. Tut for these base sorts of corruption in Common wealths, not only the King,

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 14
To T H E R E A D B R. King,0r any inferior Magistrate, but Quilibet ê populomay ſtrue to be a Phiftcian, by disco. wering and impugning the error, and by perſºa- ding reformation thereof. Jºnd surely in my opinion, there cannot be a more base, and yet hurtful, corruption in a Con trey,then is the rvilevſe (or rather abuse) oft. king Tobacco in this Kingdom, which hath moved me,shortly to discover the abuses thereof in this following little Pamphlet. If anythinke it alight Argument,so is it but a toy that is beſtowed-vponit...And ſincethe Sub- ieśi is but of Smoke, Ithinke thefume of an idle brain, may ſeruefor a sufficient battery against ſofumousandfeeble an enemy. If my groundsbe foundtrue,it is all I look for; but if they cary the force offerſuaſion with them,it is all Icon wish, and more then I can expect. My only care is, that you,mydearedountrey-men, may rightly con- ceiueeuen by this ſmalleft trifle, of the sincerity of my meaning in greater matters, never to . share any pain,that maytendto the procuring of your weal andprojheritie. - Acoun-

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 15
%.º. §§§ - §§ § e-A Counterblaſte to . . Tobacco. ſºlº ris Hºpiſtºfºrº EEEIGº, Eºfº Hat the manifold abuses of this vile custom of Tobaccota- king may the betterbecſpied, it is fit,that first you enter into consideration both ofthe first Øº) originallthercof, and likewise Pº)Sº of the reasons of the first en- try thereof into this Country. For certainly as such customs, that have their first institution ei-. there from a godly.necessary,orhonorable ground, and are first brought in, by the means of some worthy, virtuous, and great Personage, are cuer, and moſtiuſtly,holden in great &reuerenteſtina- tion and account, by alwiſºvertuous, abdtem- i. spirits. So should itby the contrary, inſtly inga.gºcardiſgrace inta that sort of customs, which having their original from baſeq9rruptiºn gº- *R, Raak; their first vºn B entry - t


Page Scan 16
JM counterblafle to Tobacco. entry into a Country, by an inconsiderate and childish affectation of Novelty, as is the tree case of the first inucntion of Tobacco taking, and of the first entry thercofamong us. For T. being a cómon herb,which though under duers names) grows almost every where, was first found out by ſomc of the barbarous Indians, to be a Preserve tiue, or Antidote against the Pocks, a filthy diſ- ease, whereunto these barbarous people arc (as all men know) very much ſubſeét, what through the uncleanly and aduſt constitution of their bodies, and what through the intemperate heate of their Climate: so that as from them was first broughtin- to Christendom, that most detestable disease, so from them likewise was brought this use of Tobacco, as a stinking andvnſauorie Antidote, for so corrup- ted and execrable a Malady, the stinking Suffumi- gation whereof they yet use against that disease, ...'s so one canker or venom to eat out ano- Cre - And now good Country men, let us (I pray you)consider,what honour or policy can move us to imitate the barbarous and beastly manners of the wilde, godless, and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking a custom? Shall wee that disdain to imitate i. manners of our neighbour France (having the ſtileofthe first Christian King doom) and that cannot endurethe spirit of the Spa niards(their Kingbeingnow comparable in large- nés of Dominions,to º: of Turkie) Shallwee, Essay, that 'ſolongtiuill and . . . . a wealthy

Page Scan 17
J4 counterblafie to Tobacco. , and such toys, to go wealthy in Peace,famousandinuincible in War, fortunate in both, we that have been ever able to aide any of our fighbours (but never deafcd any of their ears with any of our supplications for aſ: ſiſtance) ſhall we, l say, without blushing, abase our ſºlues ſofarre, as to imitate these beastly Inti ems,slaves to the Spaniards, refuse to the world, and as yet aliens from the holy Covenant of God? Why doe we not as well imitate them in walking naked as they doe? in ſº glasses, feathers, de and precious stones, as they do? yeawhy do we not deny God and adore the Devil,asthey doe? - Now to the corrupted baseness of the first use of this Tobacco, doth very well agree the foolish and groundless first entry thereof into this King dome. It is not so long since the first entry of this abuse amongst us here, as this present age cannot yet very well remember,both the first Author,and the form of the first introduction of it amongst us. It was neither brought in by King, great Con- querour, nor learned Dočtor of Physic. With thereportofagreatdiſcouery for a Con- quest,some two or three Savage mé,were brought in,together with this Savage custom. But the pi- tie is, the poor wilde barbarous men died, but that vile barbarous custom is yet alive, yearn fresh vigour: so as it seems a miracle to me, how a custom springing from so vile a ground, and brought in by a father so generally hated, should be welcomed upon so slender a warrant. For if , B 2 they

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 18
A counterbaile to Tobacco. they that first put it in practise here, had remem. bred for what respect it was used by them from whence it came, I am sure they wouldhaue been loath, to have taken ſofarre the imputation of that disease upon them as they did, by using the cure thereof. For Sana non est opuſ Medico, and con terpoiſons are never vicd, but where Poison is thought to precede. ... But ſtºce it is true, that divers customs slightly ºf grounded, and with no better warrant entered in a , Commonwealth.mayyet in the vſeofthem there- . , ºr after, proofs both necessary and profitable; it is ‘’, therefore next to be examined, if there be not a full Sympathise and true Proportion, between the base groundard foolish entry, and the loathsome and hurtful use ofthis stinking Antidote. ... I am now thereforeheartily to pray you to con- cider, first upon what false and errorieous grounds youhaue firſtbuilt the general goodliking there- of; and next, whatſinnes towards God, and foo- liſh vanities before the world you commit, in the detestable use of it. . . . . . . . , ... Asfortheſedeceitfullgrounds, that have specie ally moouedyou to takeagood andgreat conceit thereof, Iſhallconſentmyſelfe to examine here ontly fouredfthe principals of them; twofounded upon the Theoricke of a deceiueable appearance of Reason, and two of them upon the mistaken Braćtickeof general Experiohesis: "..., , ; ; {{First, itisholight by you aſure Aphoriſine in the Physics, ihatshebtainesofallmen, basing - - 9 naturally

Page Scan 19
JA counterbliſle to Tobacco. - naturally cold and wet, all dry and hot things should be good for them; of which nature this ſtin-. king ſuffumigation is, and therefore of good use to them. Of this Argument, both the Proposition and Assumption are false, and so the Conclusion cannot but be void of itself. For as to the Pro position, That because the brains are cold and moist, therefore things that are hotcand dry are best for them, it is an inept consequence: For man being compounded of the four Complexions, . (whose fathers are the sour Elements) although there be a mixture of themall in all the parts of his body, yet must the divers parts of our Microcosm or little world within our selves, be diuctſly more inclined, some to one, some to another complexi- on,according to the diversity of their uses, that of these discords a perfeót harmony may bee made up for the maintenance of the whole body. The application then of a thing of a contrary nature, to any of these parts, is to interrupt them of their duefunétion, and by conſequencehurtfull to the health of the whole body. As if a man, be- cause the Liver is hot (as the fountain of blood) and as it were anouen to the stomach,would ther- fore apply and wear close upon his Liver and ſto- macke a cake of lead; he might within a very short time (I hope) be sustained very good cheap at an Ordinary, beside the clearing of his conscience from that deadly sin of glutronie. And as if, be- causes Heart is full of vitallſpirits, and in per- petuallmotion, a man would thereforelay aheauy o B 3 - pound

End of Section. Continue to next section or go to Table of Contents

Section
Page Scan 20
JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. poundſtone on his breast, for staying and holding down that wanton palpitation,ldoubt not but his breast would bee more bruised with the weight thereof, then the heart would be comforted with such a disagreeable & contrary cure.And even ſoisit with the Brains. For if a man, because the Brains are cold and humid, would therefore use inwardly by smells, or outwardly by application, things of hot and dry quality, all the gain that he could make thereof would only be to put himself in agreat forwardness for running mad, by ouer- watching himself, the coldness and moistness of our brain being the only ordinary means that procure our sleep and rest. Indeed I doe not deny,but when it falls out that any of these, or an part ofour body grows to be diſtempered,and to tend to an extremitiebeyond the compass of Na- tures temperate mixture, that in that case cures of contrary qualities, to the intemperate inclination of that part,being wisely prepared and diſcreetcly ministered, maybe both łºś. and helpefull for strengthening and assisting Nature in the expulsion ofher enemies: for this is the true definition of all profitable Physic. ' v. - But first these Cures ought not to beevſed, but where there is need of them,the contrary where- af, is daily praśliſed in this general use of Tobacco by all sorts and complexions of people, Andnext, deny the Minor ofthisargument,as Ihaus already said, in regard that this Tobacco, is not ſimplyoſadry&hotgualitiesbuttatherhatha - - - certain

Page Scan 21
JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. certain venomous faculty joined with the heate thereof, which makes ithauean Antipathicagainſt nature, as by the hateful smell thereof doethwell appear. For the Nose being the proper Organ and convoy of the sense of ...; to the brains, which are the only fountain of that sense, doth ever serve us for an infallible witness,whether that Odour which we smell, be healthful or hurtful to the brain, (except when it ſals out that the sense it self is corrupted and abused through some infer mite, and distemper in the brain.) And that the ſuffumigation thereof cannot have a drying qual tie, it needs no further probation, then that it is a smoke, all smoke and vapour, being of it self humid,as drawingneere to the nature oftheayre, and easy to be resolved again into water, where- of there needs no other proof but the Meteors, which being bred of nothing else but of the va. pours and exhalations sucked up by the Sun out of the earth, the Sea, andwaters, yet are the same smokey vapours turned, and transformed into Raynes,Snows,Dews,hoar Frosts, and such like watery Meteors, as by the contrary the ray- no clouds are often transformed and evaporated in blustering winds. - - . . The second Argument grounded on a show of reason is, Thatches filthy smoke, aſ well through the heatandſtrength thereofasby anaturall force and quality, isable and fittopurgeboth thehead and ſtomackedfRhewmes and distillations, as ex- perience teaches, by the spitting and aucyding . J - fleam,

Page Scan 22
J4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. fleam, immediately after the taking of it. Butch fallacy of this Argument may cozily appear, by my late preccding description of the Meteors. For even as the smokey vapours sucked up by the Sun, and stayed in the lowest and cold Region ofthe ayre, are there contračted into clouds, and turned into rain and such other watery Mcteors: So this stinking smoke being sucked up by the Nose, and imprisoned in the cold and moist brains, is by their cold and wet faculty, tur- ned and cast forth again in watery distillations, and soar you made free and purged of nothing, but that wherewith you wilfuſly burdened your selves: and therefore are you no wiser in taking Tobacco for purgingyou of distillations,then if for preventing the Cholike you would take all kind of windy meates and drinks, and for preventing of the Stone, you would take all kind of meates and drinks that would breed gravel in the Kid- nays, and then when you were forced to avoid much windcout of your stomach,and much gra- uell in your Urine, that youſhould attribute the thankethereof to such nouriſhments asbred those withinyou; that behooved either to be expelled by the force of Nature, or you to have burst at the *::::i. º: - * : ... As for the other two reasons founded upon ex- perience the firſtofviiichis, Thatthewholepec. ple would not hag taken ſogenerallagoodliking thereofiftheyhadnot by experiencefoundisvº is ſolºissandsºeiſoúliº Făranº : t .2% there:

Page Scan 23
JA counterblaſte to Tobacco. thereunto, how easily the minds of any people, wherewith God hath replenished this world,may be drawn to the foolish affectation of any nouel- tie, Ileaue it to the discreet iudgenient of any man that is reasonable. - Doe we not daily see, that a man can no sooner bring oiler from beyond the Seas any new form of apparel, but that hee cannot bee thought a manof spirit, that would not presently imitate the same? And so from hand to hand it spreads, till it be practised by all, not for any commodity that is in it,but only because it is come to be the fashion. . For such is the force of that natural Selfe-loue in every one of us, and such is the corruption of en- uie bred in the breast of eucryone, as we cannot be contentvnleſſe weimitate everything that our fel- lowes doe, and so prove our ſclues capable of everything whereof they are capable, like Apes, counterfeiting the manners ofcthers, to our own deſtrućtion. Forced one or two ofthe greatest Ma- ſters of Mathematics in any of the two famous Universities,but constantly affirmeany clear day, that they see some strange apparition in the skies: they will Iwarrantyoube ſecondedbythe greatest part of the Students in that profession: Soloed will they be; to bee thought inferior to their fel- lowes, either indepth of knowledge or ſharpncſſe of sight: And therefore the generallgood liking and embracing of this fooliſhcuſtome, docs but only proceed from that affectation of noueltic, and popularerrour, *:: Ihaucalready ſiFº - ... EEC t – `A.


Page Scan 24
JAſcounterblaſte to Tobacco. The other argument drawn from a miſł:ken experience, is but the more particular probation of this general, because it is alleged to be found trueby proof, that by the taking of Tobacco divers and very many doe . thcmfclues cursed of di- uers diseases, as on the other part, no maneuer re- ceiued harm thereby. In this argument there is first a great mistaking, and next a monstrous ab- ſurditie. For is it not a very great mistaking,to take Non cauſamprocauſa,as they say in the Logicks?be- cause peradventure when a sick manhath had his disease atthe height,heehath at that instant taken Tobacco, and afterword his disease taking the natu- rall course ofdeclining, and consequently the pate ent of recovering his health, O then #: Tobacco forsooth, was the worker of that miracle. Beside that,it is a thing well known to all Physicians,that the apprehension and conceit ofthe patient, hath bywakening and uniting the vitallſpirits, and so strengthening nature, agreat power and virtue, to curediuers diseases Foraneuident proof of miſ: takingin the likecaſe, I prayyou what fooliſhboy, whatſilliewench, whatoldedoting wise, or igno- rant country clown, is not a Physician for the toothache,for the cholidae,&divers such common diseases?Yea, will noteuery manyou meetewih- al,teachyouaſundry curefortheſame,and swear by that mean either himself, or some of his no rest kinsmen and friends was cured? And yet I *::::::: fooliſhastobeleeue them. And altheſetoyesdoonly proceed from themiſtaking Neº - - - - - !

Page Scan 25
JA counterblaſte to Tobacco. Non cauſar, pro cauſa, as Ihaue already said, and so if a man chance to recouerone of any disease,after he hath taken Tobacco, that muſthauctile thanks of all But by the contrary, if a man ſmoke himself to death with it (and many have done) Othen some other disease must bear the blame for that fault. So doe oldeharlots thank their harlotry for their many years, that custom being health full (say they) adpurgandos Renes, but neuerhaue mindehow many die of the Pockcs in the flower of their youth. And so doe old drunkards think . they prolong their days, by their ſwinelike diet, but never remember howe many die drowned in drink before they behalf old.: And what greater abſurditiecantherebee,then to say that one cure ſhall serve for divers, nay,con- trarious sorts of diseases? It is an undoubted ground among all Physicians, that there is almost no sort either of nourishment or medicine, that hath not ſomethingin it disagreeable to some part of mans body, because, as I have already said, the nature ofthe temperatureofeuerypart, is so diffe- rent from another, that accordingtothe old pro uerbe,That which is good for the head, iseuillfor the neck and the shoulders. For euenas a ſtron enemy,thatinuades a town or fortress,although # in his siege thereof, he doebelaie and compass it roundabout yet he makes his breach and entry, at some one or few ſpeciallparts thereof, which hee hathtried and found to bee weakeſtand leaſtable toreſiſt; so sickness dothmakeherparticular aſ C 2 fault

Page Scan 26
JA counterlliſie to Tobacco. fault, upon such part or parts of our body, as are weakcſtand easiest to be overcome by that sort of disease, which then doth aſſailevs, although all the rest of the body by Sympathise feel itself,to be as it were belayed, and besieged by the afflićtion of that special part, the grief and smart thercoſ be- ing by the ſcnce offeeling dispersed through all the rest of our members. And therefore the skilful Physician presses by such cures to purge&ſtreng- then that part which is afflićted, as are only fit for that sort of disease, and doe best agree with the na- ture of that infirm part; which being abused to a disease of another nature,would prove as hurtful for the one,as helpful for the othcr. Yea,not on- lie will a skilful and wary Physician bec careful to use no cure but that which is fit for that sort of dis. ease,but he will also consider all other circliſtances, and make the remedies suitable thereunto: as the temperature of the climewhere the Patient is, the constitution of the Planets,the time of the Moon, the season oftheyere,the age & complexion of the Patient,&the present state of his body, in strength or weakness. Forone cure must noteuerbevſed for the selfsame disease, but according to the varying of any ofthe foreſaid circumstances, that sort of remedy muſtbevſed which is fittest for the same. Whereby the contrary in this case,such is the miraculous omnipotence of our strong tasted Tobacco,as it curesall sorts of diseases(which never any drug could dobefore) in all persons,andat alltimes. It curesall manner of distillations, either 1In

Page Scan 27
JA counterblafle to Tobacco. in the head or stomach (if you belceuc their Axi. omes) although in very deed it doeboth corrupt the brain, and by causing over quick digestion, fill the stomach full of crudities. It cures thc Got in the feet,and (which is miraculous)in that very instant when the ſmoke thereof,aslight, flies up into the head,the vertuethereof, as heavy, runs down to the little toe It helps all sorts of Agues. It makes a man sober that was drunk. It refreshes a weary man, and yet makesaman hungry. Being taken when they goeto bed, it makes one sleep soundly, and yet being taken when a man isſleepie and drowsy, it will, as they say, awake his brain, and quicken his vinderſtanding. As for curing of the Pocks, itſerues for that use but among the pocky Indian slaves. Here in Englanditis refined, and will not deign to cure here any other then cleanly and gentlemanly diseases. Oomnipotent power of Tobacco And if it could by the ſmoke thereof chase out devils, as the ſmoke of Tobias fish did(which I am sure could ſmelno ſtronglier) it would serve for a precious Relic, both for the superstitions Priests, and the insolent Puritans, to cast out devils withal. Admitting then, and not confessing that the use thereof were healthful for some sorts of diseases; should it bevſed for all sicknesses?should it be used by allmen?should it bevſedatal times?yeaſhould it bevſed by able young,ſtronghealthful men? Me- dicine hath that virtue,that it neuerleaueth a man in that state wherinitfindeth him: it makes a sick ' ' ' '. C 3 II].3ſl

Page Scan 28
--- --- JM counterblaſte to Tobacco. man whole, but a whole man sick. Andas Medi. cine helps nature being takcn at times of neceſſi. * tie, so being cuer and continually used, it doth but - weaken,weary, and wear nature. What speak I of Medicine? Nay let a man every hour of the day, or as oft as many in this country use to take Tobacco, let a man Essay, but takeasoft the best sorts of nouriſhments in mcatc and drink that can bee devised, hee ſhall with the continual use thereof weaken both his head and his stomach: all his members ſhall become feeble, his spirits dull, and in the end,as a drouſielaziebelly-god,he ſhalleua- niſhina Lethargy. - And from this weakness it proceeds, that ma- ny in this kingdomchaue had such a continuallvſe oftaking this vnſauorieſmoke,as now they are not able to forbear the same, no more then an old drunkard can abide to belong sober, withoutfal- ling into an uncurable weakness and evil conſti- tution: for their continual custom hath made to them,habitum,alterånataram:so to those that from their birthhaue been continually nourished upon poison and thingsvenemous, wholesome meates are oncly poiſonable. \ . Thushāuingas Itruſte,sufficiently answered the moſtprincipallarguments that aroused in defence of thisvile custom, it reſtsonely to informeyou whatſinnes and vanities you commit in the filthy abuse thereof. First, are you not guilty of sinful andſhamefullluſt? (forluftmaybee as wellinany of the senses as in feeling) that althoughyoubce troubled

Page Scan 29
-A corºntºr!! isle to Tºbicco. troubled with to ºf 3:c, but in perfect heal.h, yet can yo; nº it.c. bc in jetty at an Ordinaric, nor lat- citºus in the Secwes, if you lackc Tobacco to pro uoke yoºr appetite to any of those forts of recreaſi- on, utting after it as the children of Israel did in the wildcrucile after Quails? Secondly it is, as you use or rather abuse it, a branch of thc sin of drun- Arnneſſe, which is the root of all sins: for as the only delight that di unkards take in Wine is in the strength of the taste, & the force of the fume there- of that mounts up to the brain: for no drunkards love any weak, or sweet drink: so are not those (Imeane the strong heate and the fumc) the only qualities that make Tobaccoſo del&table to all the lovers of it? And as no man likes strong heads drink thc first day (because memorpenteſt turpiń. ſimus) but by custom is piece and piece allured, while in the end, a drunkard willhaue as great a thirst to bee drunk, as a sober man to quench his thirst with a draught when heehath need of it. So is not this the very case of all the great takers of Tobacco Pwhich therefore they themselves do attri- bute to a bewitching qualitiein it.Thirdly,is it not the greatest sin of all, that you the people of all sorts of this Kingdom, who are created and or- deigned by God to bestow bothyour persons and goods for the maintenance both of the honour and safety of your King and Common-wealth, should diſableyourſeluesinboth?Inyourperſons having by this continuallvile custom brought your ſeluesto this ſhamefullimbecilitic, that you 2IC

Page Scan 30
A counterblaſte to Tobacco. arc notable to ride or walk the journey of a Jaws Sabboth, but you must haucarcekiccole brought you from the next poor house to kindle your To- tobacco with? whereas he cannot be thought able for any service in the wars, that cannot cndure of centimes the want of mcate, drink, and sleep, much more then must hee cndure the want of To- tobacco. In the timesofthemany gloriousandvićto- rios battles fought by this Nation,there was no word of Tobacco; but now if it werc time of wars, and that you were to make some sudden Cauakado upon your enemies, if any of you should seek lei- sure to stay behind his fellow for taking of To- tobacco, for my part I should never bee sores for any evil chance that might befall him. To take a cu- ſtome in anything that cannot bee left again, is most harmful to the people of any land. Mollicies and delicacy were the wrack and overthrow, first ofthe Persian, and next of the Roman Empire. And this very custom oftaking Tobacco (whereof our present purpose is) is even at this day accoun- +ed so effeminate among the Indians themselves, as in the market they will offer no price for a slave to be sold, whomethey find to be a great Tobacco taker. - Now how you are by this custom disabled in yourgoods, let the Gentry of this land bear wit- neſe, some of them bestowing three, some four hundred pounds a yeerevpon this precious stink, which I am sure might be bestowed upon many farrebetter uses, Ireadindeedcofaknauiſh Cour- º "- ticr;

Page Scan 31
-4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. tier, who for abusing the fauourof the Emperor Udlexander Seweru his Master takingbribes to intercede, for sundry persons in his Masters ear, ..(for whom he never once opened his mouth)was justly choked with ſmoke, with this doom, Fame erest,4* famsm, la: but of so many smoke {j as are at this present in this kingdom, I never readnor heard. And for the vanities committed in this filthy custom,isit not both great vanitieandvncleane- ness, that at the table,a placeofreſpect, of clean lines, of modesty, men should not be ashamed, to sit tossing of Tobacco pipes, and puffing of the ſmoke of Tobaccoone to another, makingthefilthy ſmoke and stink thereof, to exhale athwart the dishes, and infect the air, when very often, men that abhor it are at their repast? Surely Smoke becomes akitchin far better thena Dining sham ber, and yet it makes a kitchen also oftentimes in the inward parts of men, soiling and infeaing them, withan vnétuousandoily kind of Soot,as hathbene found in some great Tobacco takers,that after their death were opened. And not only meatetime,but no other timenoraćtion is exemp- ted from the public use of this uncivil trick: so as if the wines of Deep list to contest with this Nation for good manners, their worst manners would in all reason be found at least not so diſho- nest (as ours are) in this point. The public use whereof, at all times,andinallplaces,hath now so farrepreuailed, as divers men very sound both in D judgment,

Page Scan 32
.4 counterblaſte to Tobacco. judgment,and complexion,hauebeneatlaſt ſor- ced to take it also without desire, partly because they were ashamed to ſecme singular,(like the two Philosophers that were forced to duck themſelugs in that rain water, and so become foolesaſwell as the rest of the people) and partly,to be as one that was content to eat Garlic (which hee did not love) that he might not be troubled with the smell of it, in she breath of his fellows. And is it not a great vanity,that a man cannot heartily welcome his friend now, but straight they must bee in hand with Tobaceof Noit is become in place of a cure,a point of goodfellowſhip, and he that will refuse to take a pipe of Tobacco among his fellows, (though by his own election he would rather feel the savour of a Sink) is accounted peevish and no good company, even as they doe with §. in the cold Eastern Countries. Yeathe Mistress cannot in a more mannerly kind, enter- taine her servant, then by giving him out of her fair hand a pipe of Tobacco. But herein is not only a great vanity, but a great contempt of Gods good gifts, that the sweetness of mans breath, being a good gift of God, should bewil- fully corrupted by this flinking ſmoke, wherein I must confess, it hath too strong a virtue: and so that which is an ornament of nature, and can nei- there by any artifice be at the first acquired, nor oncelóſt,berecouered again,ſhall j Core rupted with an incurable stink, which vile qua liticisa; directly contrary to that wrong opinion * … ." . º which

Page Scan 33
JA counterblafie to Tobacco. which is holden of the wholeſomneſſe thereof, as the venom of Futrifaction is contrary to the for tu Preſcruatiue. Morcouer,which is a great iniquity,and against all humanity, thchusband ſhall not bee aſhained, to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome, and clean complexioned wife, to that extremitic,that cither she inuſt also corrupt her sweet breath therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking torment. , Haucyou not reason then to bee aſhaned, and to forbear this filthy noucltie, so basely groun- ded, so foolishly received,and so grossly mistaken in the right use thereof.” In your abuse thereofſin- ning against God, harming your selves both in persons and goods, and raking also thereby the marks and notes of vanity upon you; by the cu- ſtome thereof making your selves to be wondered at by all foreign ciuilNations,and by all strangers that come amongyou, to be scorned and contem- ned. A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the Nose, harmful to the brain, daungerousto the Lungs,and in the blackeſtinking fume there- of, nearest resembling the horrible Sty gain ſmoke of the pit that is bottomeleſſe.