A Psalm of thanksgiving, to be sung by
the Children of Christs Hospital, on Monday in the Easter
holy days, at Saint Mary Spittle, for their Founders and
Benefactors. Anno Domini. 1610.
REgard O Lord from heaven above, accept the hearty praise, which
Children render for the love, thou show to them always.

These two lines are
to be sung by one or
two of the Children,
and then repeated by
the people and all the
Children.

THe goodness of the Lord is seen, in all that he hath made, his mercy it is in all extremes
that sends his creatures aide. No worm so small, no wight so poor, but he preserves still,
the sick he heales, the weak sustains, and hungry soul doth fill. Wee Orphants poor like mercy found,
when means and friends were scant, our gracious God a Prince did move, to slake and ease our want.

     Regard O Lord, etc.

The ground-worke of our good thus laid, God raised us Patrons dear
Whose liberal hands did still provide, to rid our hearts from fear.
You Citizens those patrons are, by you we Orphants live,
Food, raiment, learning, all we want, to us you largely give.
Bless their endeavours Lord we pray; increase likewise their store,
That those in plenty may abound, which help to feed the poor.
     Regard O Lord, etc.

O Lord upon our Sovereign King, power down thy heavenly grace
Preserve his Queen, defend the Prince, bless all his royal race.
Plant wisdom in his Counsellours, grant to his Nobles might,
Thy church maintain, thy pastors save, that they may teach aright.
On City, Mayor, and Aldermen. Lord let thy mercy fall,
By whom our states are thus relieved, and wee releast from thrall.
     Regard O Lord etc.


CHildren kept in Christ's Hospital at this present 630
Children put forth Apprentices, and dead this year out of
Christ's hospital. 54
There hath been cured this year past in Saint Bartholmews Hospi-
tall of Soldiers and other diseased people. 602
There is in the said Hospital under cure at this present. 253
There hath been cured this year past in Saint Thomas Hospital of
Soldiers and other diseased people. 812
There is in the said Hospital under cure at this present 166
Toward the which godly & charitable foundation, King
Henry the eight, & King Edward the sixth, were most
gracious founders and liberal benefactors.
A Report for Bridewell.
THere hath been brought to the Hospital of Bride-
well within the space of one year last past, of wan-
dring soldiers and other vagrant people, which have
been passed thence into their native countries by Pas-
ports, according to the law in that case provided,
to the number of 1697. of whom many have been
chargeable to the said Hospital in their diet, for
the time of their being in the same: some more,
some less, as they might thence be conveniently re-
moved, besides other helps there ministered unto ma-
ny of them, as cause required: viz. in Hose, Shoes,
Shirts, bands, money and such like, which cannot
be avoided by reason of their misery, nor they thence
passed without charge to the said Hospital, in respect
they are to be examined, and considered of, to what
country to be transported. Also there is in the said ho-
spitall maintained and kept in Arts and occupations,
and other servile works and labours, at the charges
of the said Hospital, of men, women, and children, to
the number of 130. persons, whereof 88, and upwards
are poor boys taken out of divers Parishes and
streets of this City, and now bound Apprentices
in the said Hospital to be made Freemen of this City
at the end of their several Terms. T.S.
Printed at London by E. Allde for W. Barley dwelling in Gracious street. 1610.
Sum Privilegio.