A SHORT CATECHISM, OR, PLAIN INSTRUCTION, CONTAINING THE SOME OF CHRISTIAN LEARNING, SET FORTH BY THE KING'S MAJESTY'S AUTHORITY, FOR ALL SCHOOLMASTERS TO TEACH. 1553. An Injunction given by the King our Sovereign Lord, his most excellent Majesty, to all Schoolmasters and Teachers of Youth, within all his Grace's realms and dominions, for authorizing and establishing the use of this Catechism. Edward the Sixth, by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith; and of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, the Supreme Head:—To all Schoolmasters and Teachers of Youth. When there was presented unto us, to be perused, a short and plain order of Catechism, written by a certain godly and learned man, we committed the debating, and diligent examination thereof, to certain bishops, and other learned men, whose judgment we have in great estimation. And because it seemed agreeable with the Scriptures, and the ordinances of our realm, we thought it good, not only for that agreement to put it forth abroad to print: but also, for the plainness and shortness, to appoint it out for all schoolmasters to teach. That the yet unskilful and young age, having the foun. dations laid, both of religion and good letters, may learn godliness together with wisdom; and have a rule for the rest of their life, what judgment they ought to have of God, to whom all our life is applied; and how they may please God, wherein we ought, with all the doings and duties of our lives to travail. We will therefore and command, both all and each of you, as ye tender our favour, and as ye mind to avoid the just punishment of transgressing our authority, that ye truly and diligently teach this Catechism in your schools, immediately after the other brief Cate- chism which we have already set forth: that young age, yet tender and wavering, being by authority and instructions of true religion stablished, may have a great furtherance to the right worshipping of God, and good helps to live in all points according to duty. Where- with being furnished, by better using, due godliness toward God, the Author of all things; obedience toward their king, the shepherd of the people; loving affection to the commonweal, the general mother of all; they may seem not born for themselves, but be profitable and dutiful toward God, their king, and their country. Given at Greenwich the 20th of May, the 7th year of our reign. EDWARD VI.