CORRESPONDENCE, 

&c. &c. 



LORD COBHAM AND DOCTOR WOTTON TO THE QUEEN.* 
(13 Dec. 1558. Abridged.) 

FIRST, coming to Arras the first of December, the Bishop 
of Ely and Deane of Canterbury, being att Corcams, but 
departing because the assembly there was dissolved, uppoii 
our letters they meeting us at Arras the next day, we delivered 

* Mary, with no other object than that of pleasing Philip of Spain, 
her husband, had, in 1557, joined him in a war against France, in which 
war England lost Calais and all footing in that country. At the 
time of Elizabeth's accession, the Earl of Arundel, Thirlby, bishop of 
Ely, and Dr. Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury, were with the 
Spanish King in the Netherlands, commissioned to negotiate a peace. 
Wotton was an able arid apparently an honest statesman, and was 
one of the thirteen of Mary's counsellors who were retained by Eliza- 
beth at her coming to the throne. Immediately after her accession, 
William Brooke, Lord Cobham, was deputed to announce to the 
Spaniards the Queen's accession, and to acquaint them that she had 
added to the commission for negotiating a peace, William, Lord 
Howard of Effingham. This letter is an early abridgment of their 
first dispatch. King Philip had many reasons for not showing at 
VOL. I. B 



2 ACCESSION OF QUEEN ELIZABETH. [DEC. 

your letters and received advertisement of that which passed 
att Corcams.* The morrow we departed with the Dearie of 
Canterbury to Bruxelles, coming thither the 7 December. 
The King wrott to the Bishopp of Arrasf to bring us to him 
to G-ravendall, a monasterie in a forrest two leagues from 
Bruxelles. There after your maje*stie's comendations don, I 
delivered your letters, which perceivinge to be of creditt, he 
willed me to declare yt ; which don, the Bishopp, informed 
by the King, declared his grief for the death of your sister and 
his wief, and he commended her affection and virtue to hym. 
After he expressed his comfort in that your Highnes was 
peaceablie come by just succession to the crowne, wishinge 
you long raigne, in 'honor and prosperitie ; and for con- 
tinuance of amitiemade betwixt your fathers, he ismostgladd 
to see you so well minded, and doth imbrace it willinglie. 
Here the Deane of Canterburie delivered that this confederacie 
was noe new thing, and not don for comoditie onelie, but 
necessitie against theire common enemy, who encreased his 
limitts against his neighbour by falsehood and forces, in 
spoilinge his auncestors of the duchy of Burgundye, and your 
auncestors of Guienne, and since the common enemy is here- 
bie now more strong, yt behoveth that betweene your majesties 
the straight amitie be more trulie observed. To this the 
King said, that yt was true, and by oppression the common 
enemy made stronger ; and the necessitie of this league the 

first any dislike to the new Queen, and as yet he knew nothing of 
her intentions. His unqualified acknowledgment of her right to the 
throne is curious. The peace was concluded at Cateau Cambresis on 
the 2nd of April, 1559. 

This letter is referred to in Lord Burgley's Diary " Dec. 13. L. 
Cobham and D. Wootton send Mr. Richard Shelly with the letters to 
the Queen's Majesty." 

* Before Mary's death, the first Congress for negotiating a peace 
was held at the Abbey of Cercamps, on the borders of Picardy, from 
which it was moved afterward to Cateau Cambresis. 

t This was Cardinal Granvelle, son of Chancellor Granvelle, one of 
the most trusty ministers of Charles V. 



1558.] NEGOTIATIONS FOR PKACK WITH FRAN< I:. 3 

King hath acknowledged by his speeches and letters during 
the assemblie at Corcams, as Mr. Deane knoweth. Then I 
declared that you had in furtherance of the peace renewed 
the commissions and instructions to the Earle of Arundell, the 
Bishopp of Elie, and the Deane of Canterburye, determined* 
by your sester's death, " hopinge that as in her tyme, withoute 
her privitie, you wold conclude nothinge, soe you will con- 
tynue towards the Queene now, concluding nothing without 
the restitution of Callis. To this he semed glad for renew- 
ing the commissions, but for the rest, because he had not 
spoke with the Duke of Alva,f and Ruy Gomez,! his com- 
missioners, he could not answer. 

Sir Richard Shelly is sent with this letter, being able by 
reason of his abode here to enforme your Highnes of the 
humour and states of thinges here. 

Your Highnes humble and most bounden subjects, 

W. COBHAM. N. WOTTON. 



SIR WILLIAM FITZWILLIAMS TO MR. MORE. || 

SIR, I can but for these your late lettyrs, and all othyr 
your gentlenes, render onto you moste hertie thanks, and to 

* i. e. ended. 

t Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke of Alva, infamous in history as the 
oppressor of the Netherlands, was one of the greatest of the ministers 
of Philip II. " He was/' says Watson, in his Life of this King, " ar- 
rogant, vain, and proud ; violent, inflexible, and relentless ; but patient, 
prudent, and sagacious ; inured from his youth to arms, and possessed 
of consummate skill in the art of war." 

t Ruy Gomez de Silva, Prince of Eboli, was the chief favourite and 
confidant of the KinJ and the rival of the Duke of Alva. 

Sir William Fitzwilliams, of Milton in Northamptonshire, ancestor 
of the present Earl Fitzwilliam. He married the sister of Sir Henry 
Sidney, and was himself five times Lord Deputy of Ireland. In the 
great lack of correspondence at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, the 
present letter has been reprinted from Kempe's Loseley Manuscripts. 
It is also printed incorrectly in Ellis. 

|| William More, of Loseley in Surrey, who was at this time Sheriff 
of the counties of Surrey and Sussex. 

13 2 



4 DISCOUNTENANCE OF THE PAPISTS. [DEC. 

th' effect of your saide lettyrs, you shall ondyrstande that 
apon Saturdeye last, he beyng at Londyn, my sone Browne* 
wrote oneto me, that he hade onderstandyng my Lord Cham- 
berlaynf began to make labore for his sone to be one of the 
knyghts for that shyre. Whereapon I sent to Mr. Cawerdeii 
to knowe hys opinion theryn, whose awnswer was, that for 
hys owne parte he wolde take no knoledge of annye suche 
mattyrs, nor he thoght gode that my son sholde, saying 
furdyr that oneles my son dyd stande for the same he wolde 
not, and that he undyrstode Mr. Sawndyrs made at the de- 
syre 6f my saide lord earnest mene onto the freeholders 
abowte Kyngston, which made answere that theye had pro- 
mysyd ther gode wylls beffore, &c. Thus have I certeffyd my 
sayd sone of Mr. Cawyrden his mynde, and of my owen 
also, which is myche agreable to the same. 

And I hope with the gode helpe of you and othyr gode 
frends the mattyr wyll go well ynoghe on owr syde, &c. Mr. 
Teylle wil be with you apon Wensdaye week, &c. 

And for newes you shall ondyrstand that yestyrdaye beyng 
Chrystemas day, the Queue's majestic repayryd to hyr great 
closet, with hyr nobles and ladyes, as hath ben acustomyd yn 
such high feasts. And she perseving a bysshope preparing 
himselfe to make all in the olde fowrme, she taryyd there one- 
till the gospell was done, and when all the people lokyd ffor 
hyr to have offryde according the olde facion, she with hyr 
nobles returnyd agayn from the closet and the masse, onto 
hir priveye chamber, which was strange onto dyvers, &c. O 
blessid be God in all his gifts, &c.t You shall knowe more 

* Sir Thomas Brown of Betch worth Castle in Dorking, who married 
Mabyl, daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliams. " 

f William Lord Howard of Effingham. 

J It is well known that for at least a month after the accession of 
Elizabeth, no change was made in the religion of the State. She waited 
till she had her ministry settled and her parliament assembled. As 
the time of the meeting of parliament approached, she began to show 
more openly her intentions, and the circumstance here mentioned was 
one of the first prognostics of the great change that was to come. " On 



1558.] SIR THOMAS CHALONER. 5 

of this matter by Mr. Teylle, &c. I pray you to commende 
me and my wiff'e, first onto yourself and then onto your 
gode wyfe, &c. This Saynt Stevenes night, by 

Your as his own, 

WYLLIAM FITZWYLLIAMS. 



SIR THOMAS CHALONER* TO SIR WILLIAM CECIL. 

Sir, after my moste herty and due commendations, by the 
contents of my letters and other papers sent herewith to the 
Queue's Majestic, you shall perceive the summe of myne ad- 

the first of January, following," says Fuller, "being Sunday (the best 
New Yeere's gift that ever was bestowed on England) by vertue of 
the Queene's proclamation, the letanie was read in English, with 
epistles and gospels, in all churches of London, as it was formerly in 
her Grace's own chappel." Happy it was for England that the change 
was made deliberately and quietly, without the violent commotions 
that broke out in other countries, where the authorities were opposed 
to the rising opinions. 

* Sir Thos. Chaloner had been sent as envoy to the Emperor Ferdi- 
nand, then at Cambray, to announce the accession of Elizabeth, on 
the 26th of November, 1558. He was afterwards, July 17, 1559, sent 
into the Low Countries to be ambassador resident to King Philip, to 
whom he presented himself at Brussels in that character at the begin- 
ning of August. This letter must have been written very shortly 
after his arrival, when the King was already making preparations for 
his return to Spain. In spite of his professions and his apparent 
honesty in the transactions at Gateau Cambresis, Sir Thomas seems to 
have quickly seen through the hollowness of the friendship which 
the Spanish king pretended to entertain towards his mistress. 

Sir Thomas, who was by birth a Londoner, and had been educated 
at Cambridge, had attended Sir Henry Knevet's embassy to Charles 
V. in 1541, and accompanied that monarch in his expedition to Al- 
giers. In the passage he had a very narrow escape " for the galley 
wherein he was, being either dashed against the rockes, or shaken with 
mighty stormes, and so cast away, after he had saved himself a long 
while by swimming, when his strength failed him his armes and 



(> PROFESSIONS OF THE SPANISH KING. [AUG. 

v ertisements which here therefore to repete were superfluous. 
Although the King himself and Monsieur d' Arras* use me 
with very good words, yet I know otherwise what opinion 
secrete they have. And in very dede there is no more amitie 
to be loked for at their hands then respect of their private 
utilitie endureth. 

I humbly beseach you, sir, have good remembrance unto the 
shortnes of the tyme and helpe, I may the soner have retorne 
of letters for signification of the Queue's pleasure to me, 
seing the King here embarqueth so shortly. I have not yet 
discovered to any man her Majestie's pleasure touching my 
abode here as she promised me, trusting before that tyme I 
shall have speciall letters in her behaulf. Nevertheles, if the 
same come not in tyme, whiche God forbidd, I must be faine 
to frame some good invencion to the ... for myne accesse at 
the King's embarking. Thus in health and welfare I pray 
God send you all things prosperous. From Ghent, the . . . 
August 1559. 

Alwayes assured at your good commandement, 

THO. CHALONER. 

Beseche you, sir, le.tt me heare somewhat from you, 
whether ye have received my . . . and somewhat of our newes 
there ... I beseche you, sir, help that the wan-ants for my diet 
may something be amended, so as I may receive a two or 
three monthes diets afore. All things here are oultrageously 
dear beyond measure. 

Your worship's again and very friend, 

THO. CHALONER. 



handes being faint and weary, with great difficulty laying hold with 
his teeth on a cable, which was cast out of the next gaily, not with- 
out breaking and losse of certaine of his teeth, at length recovered 
himselfe, and returned home into his countrey in safety." Hakluyt. 
* The Bishop of Arras. 



1551).] PLOT 15V THE .SPANIARDS. 7 

MINUTES OF SIR T. CHALONER'S CORRESPONDENCE.* 

(To the Queen, 3 August!, 1.559.) 

Ill reports of your Majesty be here delivered ; the ground 1 
think to be the frustrate suite of the King in his marriage 
with you. Although whatever rage they bear to us, they 
pretend it for the alteration of religion by your Majesty. 
Cont Feriaf told me he was sorry to see your present ene- 
my the French only gaping for opportunity, you being 
without money, men, armour, fortresses, practise in war, or 
good captains : " And what a council !" quoth he, and so 
began sang that England wold be another Millanne to 
set the princes together by the ears that the young King 
was ruled by your great enemy the Guise, and you should 
have hard of them before this, " if my master wold have 
given assent." Though the Spaniards doe somewhat mis- 
like us, yet in this lowe parts in all conferences they take our 
parts. A plot discovered by one Hoggin, that before the 
French kinge's death, the Spaniards meant to have stolen my 
Lady Katherine Gray, whom they meant either to marie to 
the Prince of Spain, or some other of less degree, if less 
depended on her. They take her discontented, not esteemed 



* The following abstracts of letters, printed from the Cotton MS. 
Galba, C. I., illustrate, in a very interesting manner, the mutual position 
of England and Spain in the first year of the reign of Elizabeth. King 
Philip, in his jealousy of France, reckoned much on his connexion 
with England by his marriage with Mary. Very shortly after her 
death he made his suit to the new Queen, Elizabeth, by whom he was 
for some time held in suspense, but was finally rejected. Philip, 
looking only to himself, was a good match, but the difference of rely 
gion, and the national jealousy of Spanish influence which had been 
raised by its effects during the reign of Mary, made the acceptance of 
this offer a very hazardous thing. The jealousy between France and 
Spain was at this time of immense service to England. 

t King Philip's minister in England, and a great enemy to Queen 
Elizabeth. 



8 NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE KING OF SPAIN. [AUG. 

oi'your Highncs nor her Trends.* He telleth us of a letter 
sent from the Bushopp of Aquilef, part of it conteyning theis 
words, Ho tanto tarder del Rey horn che los Inglesses se da- 
mn a Francia. How they contemne us, because we are 
unarmed, wantinge exercise and soldiours ! I remember the 
Cont Feria wold saie we had matter, but wanted forme. 
An armed prince hath ever the quiett friendshipp of his 
neighbours. 

The Rengrave offereth his services to your Majestic, and 
wisheth that England and Scotland were conjoyned, then to 
geve att forraine princes displeasure. 

(8 Augusti, 1559.) 

The Queene's letter to Sir Thomas Challoner into the Low 
Countries, ymporting that he should feele the king of Spaine 
whether he were willinge to have him goe into Spaine after 
him, or to staie there. 

Secoiidlie, to signify the Queene was sorry that she shold 
loose the king's soe neere neighbourhood. 

She offereth all the good meanes for furthering his voiage 
that her coasts and ports could afford. J 

(16 Augusti, 1559.) 

Mr. Secretarie Cecill's letter to Sir Thomas Challoner, that 

* Camden asserts that the Spaniards, fearing lest the French 
should obtain England by means of Mary Queen of Scots, had en- 
deavoured privately to carry off the Lady Katherine Grey, in order to 
set her up against the latter, on the credit of Henry's will. Katherine 
was the daughter of Henry Grey, Duke of Suffolk, by the Lady Frances 
Brandon, niece of Henry VIII. j and sister of the unfortunate Lady. 
Jane Grey. 

t Alvarez de Quadra, Bishop of Aquila, the Spanish ambassador 
in ordinary to the court of England, who proved himself to be a very 
intriguing and troublesome person there. 

t Philip set sail from the Netherlands with a fleet of near seventy 
ships, on the 20th of August, and arrived at Loredo in Biscay, the 29th 
of the same month. 



1559.] m cm-ss o PAK.MA. f) 

he should in the Queene's behalf congratulate with the 
Duchcsse of Parma* for her new regency. 



SIR THOMAS CHALLONER TO THE QUEEN. 

(18 Septembris, 1559.) 

The delivery of your Majestie's letters of gratulation and cre- 
ditt to the Regent, she being accompanied with Italian gentle 
men, the chief of her court, she received gratefully. I moved 
touching your licences for horses, and that other of Mr. Gre 
shamf your agent for powder and colanders, which I delivered 
the King before his departure, and he appointed to geve unto 
her Altesse, for so they call her. She desired to inform her- 
self with some of her council first, and then to answer. 
One Thomas Manethe, a Florentine, discoursed to me of 
a certain devise for increasing your revenues without 
offence of the subjects, discoursing how commodious that 
province was through the site, fertility, and ports, and thereby 
to bereduced to a rare form of wealth, whereas Flanders want- 
inge most of those aides, except Industry, doth now arise to 
such a wealth both of prince and subject. I have sent you 

* Margaret, Duchess of Parma, natural daughter of Philip's father, 
Charles V. The sovereignty of the Netherlands having- passed into 
the house of Austria, became joined with Spain under Charles V. 
When Philip left the Netherlands for Spain, he made his illegiti- 
mate sister, the Duchess of Parma, regent in his absence, and appoint 
ed for her chief minister Granville, Bishop of Arras. During her re- 
gency she endeavoured, as much as she dared, to soften down the 
violent measures of the bigoted Philip and the no less bigoted and per- 
secuting bishop ; but at last the king, dissatisfied by her moderation, 
sent the Duke of Alva with an army, and the duchess resigned her 
office in 1568, and rejoined her husband in Italy. 

t Sir Thomas Gresham, second son of Sir Richard Gresham, an 
alderman of London, whom we shall find constantly mixed up with 
the money matters and the affairs of trade, during the first part of the 
reign of Elizabeth. He was the founder of the Royal Exchange and 
of Gresham College. 



10 PLOT TO SURPRISE DOVER. [SEPT. 

one of his devises. He brought with him an Almayne* myner, 
who comendeth much in likeliehood the mynes in Ire- 
land.t 



SIR THOMAS CHALLONER TO MR. SECRETARIE. 

(27 Septembris, 1559.) 

A remembrance to him of the plott for surprise of Dover, 
and the hostages sent before to you by Mr. Merche, advisinge 
that although the fellowe Davyes, that did disclose it, be but 
a silly fellowe : yet because the enterprise of Callis was by a 
like fellow reveiled, but not beleeved, (*/ mens noti levafuis- 
set,) with to over late repentance to examyne it further. The 
same fellow told me of much victuall from Ipswiche con- 
veied secretly to Callis, and from other parts, and for Dun- 
kirk, of my owne knowledg more cometh thither out of Eng- 

* German. 

t In 1531, instructions were given by the privy council to Mr. Robert 
Record, surveyor of mines, to inspect the mines in Ireland, and to 
" make trial certain what gold, silver, leade, or other metall commeth 
of every hundred ower." Subsequent instructions, signed by King Ed- 
ward VI., were given to William Williams and Sir Thomas Lutterell 
(chief justice of the Common Pleas) cc to repayre to Clonrnynes, and 
all other the mynes of the Kynge's Majestye in Ireland where the Al- 
maynes have wrought ;" and among other directions to " attayn to 
som knowlege of the allam-mynes within the said realme." In their 
report on these instructions it appears that the produce of the mine 
for one year wrought by the Ahnayns was 45 tons 23 Ibs. of clean ore, 
which yielded 16 tons I cwt. 24^ Ibs. of pure lead, and this lead after- 
wards yielded four ounces of silver in the cwt. The ore dug and wrought 
by the English miners yielded six cwt. per ton of pure lead, and five 
ounces per cwt. of fine silver. The expense in working, &c. exceeded 
the value of the metal. Concerning the allom mines they had not time 
to do anything therein. 

In-1551, Joachim Gundelfinger, with a company of above fifty per- 
sons, came over from Flanders by invitation from the English govern- 
ment, to superintend the working of the mines in Ireland, among whom 
were several allom miners. 



1559.] DKKKNCK OK THK KINGDOM. 11 

land, then to Callis when it was ours. Your searchers in 
England are tomb dogs, being corrupted with offam Ccr- 
beri. 

Two or three searchers entertained at Dunkirk, in Zealand, 
and other places, wold save the Queen five thousand pounds 
a year. In Spain the inquisitors have sited the bones of 
the Duke of Maieieth, buried seven year ago, to be con- 
vinced* of heresy. 



SIR THOMAS CHALONER TO MR. SECRETARY. 

(29 Septembris, 1559.) 

It seeraeth that the Queen had sent unto him to provide 
powder and armour, and therefore he writes to my Lord that 
since we have no stuff to make powder of, and men to make 
workmen, yt were fit to make as much as should serve the 
realm, for armour and such necessary instruments of defense 
of our lives and common liberty ought never precariously to 
be sued for att our fickle neighbours hands. The Venetians 
have of late suer means to preserve their powder, preparing 
each kind of the matter fineliest beaten by itself, whereby no 
casualty of fire can work upon their kinds not assembled, 
yet when they have need, in an howre's space, they can mix 
it together and use it instantly. 

When our neighbours know we need them not, yt will 
make them become the kinder. The inquisition in Spain is 
very terrible and much misliked.f 



SIR THOMAS CHALONER TO MR. SECRETARY CECIL. 

(13 October. 1559.) 

That upon King Phillipp's arrival in Spain out of the ] ^> we 

* Convicted French convaincu. 

t The terrible persecution raised by Philip on his return to Spain, is 
told by all historians of that country. 



12 SCOTLAND JOHN KNOX. [OCT. 

Countreys, two thousand of all sorts, men, women, children, 
noble, unnoble, are apprehended for the inquisition. The 
Archbishopp of Tolledo * imprisoned, appealed to Rome. 
He calleth the inquisitors Domini Dominationes. 

(21 Octob. 1559.) 

Sir Thomas Chaloner writeth for advancement of his diett 
three moneths beforehand. 

(4idus Nov. 1559.) 

A letter to the King of Spain, that he wold write to the Pope 
to preferr Nich. Saundersf to a cardinall hatt, that the Eng- 
lish might have a credit to solicit their causes. 



JOHN KNOX* TO MR. RAYLTON. 

Your letters long looked for receaved I in Edinburgh this 
23 of October. It is most assured that such a jew r ell as your 
other writings due specifye is laitlie cumed to our realme. 
But it is keapt marvelus secreat, and the rather becaus these 
cold blastes of winter be able to cause the beaty of such 
May flowers to faid. Thus much my eis saw and my handes 
tuched : a trym staff for the Quen then Regent, sent from 
the persons whom before ye did specifye, in which were all 
things which ye expresse gorgiusly ingraved on silver, and 
double gilt. This staff was sene in the moneth of May, in 

* Bartlemi di Caranza y Miranda, archbishop of Toledo, one of the 
most virtuous and learned prelates in Spain. In Mary's reign he had 
come to England to convert the English to Catholicism. The opinions 
of the reformers had now spread considerably in Spain, and some pro- 
positions in a catechism which he had published were so construed by 
his enemies as to draw him under the arm of the inquisition. Philip 
was in the end disappointed of his prey by the interference of the pope. 

f This appears to be a note of ^ letter, perhaps intercepted, of the 
exiled English Catholics in favour of their zealous champion, Sanders 

I Knox, who had taken refuge with the Protestants at Geneva, re- 
turned to Scotland through England on the 2nd of May, 1559. 



1559.] QUEEN REUENT OF SCOTLAND DEPOSED. 13 

the same schip in which I cam to Scotland,* and was 
schawen unto me in great secrecy. The number and names 
of my needy brethren I did signify to such as be in your 
cumpariy and unto the man above. The number is now 
augmented, and thair poverty also in such sort that if relief 
be not provided speedily, I fear that mo then I mum when 
we may not so weall amend it. What wold suffice every in 
plenty, I cannot weall assure you. But such I know their 
necessity to be, that some that deli fed forty and mo in 
household, is not now able to fead two. God cumfort them ! 
for their battle is strong. 

The alteration that be heer is this the Quen-Regent, 
with public consent of the Lords and Barrens assem- 
bled, is deprived of all authority and regiment amongst us. 
Sche, Frenchmen, and assistants are by open proclamation 

* There can be no doubt that the French had been some time mature 
ing their designs not only upon Scotland, but through it upon England 
also. They had tried, on Mary's marriage, to get her kingdom made 
over, as it were, to her husband ; but not having succeeded in that 
point, they had taken advantage of the affection of the Queen-dowager 
(Mary of Guise) for her family, who now ruled in France, to fill Scot- 
land, under various pretences, with French soldiers, to awe the natives. 
The majority of the Scots were now zealous Protestants, and, with the 
turbulent independence of that people, they had little inclination to be 
deprived by a foreign power at once of civil and religious liberty. The 
nobles accordingly assembled, and finding the Queen-regent inaccessi- 
ble to their remonstrances, they proceeded deliberately to depose her 
from her office. The French, however, did not desist from their en- 
terprise : every day saw new envoys and new preparations for the con- 
quest of Scotland, or (as they termed it,) the reduction of the rebels. 
The Scots, wanting the resources which their enemies possessed, ap- 
plied to Elizabeth for aid, and the English government, well aware of 
the designs of the French, (who made no scruple of laying claim 
through Mary of Scotland to the crown of England,) by advertise 
mints from every side, sent them money, and encouraged them secretly 
to stand up for their liberties, at the same time strengthening their own 
borders on the north. 



TROUBLES IN SCOTLAND. [OCT. 

and denunced enemies and trailers to this com- 
monwealth, for that being thrise required and charged to de- 
sist from fortification of Leyth, she and thei do obstinatlie 
procead in thare wicked enterprise. This was done this 
Moundaye befor none. Thare shal be appointed to occupye 
the authoritie a great counsall, the president and cheaf head 
whereof shall be my Lord Duck. The authoritie of the French 
King and Quen is yet received, and wil be in workes till thei 
deny our most just requeastes which ye shall, God willing, 
shortlie herafter understand, together with our hole proceadings 
from the beginning of this matter, which we are to sett forth in 
maner of historic. 

The battell is begun scharpe ynoufe ; God geve the issew 
to his glory and our cumfort ! Sche hath yet small advan- 
taige, for for the death of two of our soldiours and for the 
hurting of three gentilmen, sche hath lost two captaines and 
hath for wounded many of her cheaf soldiours to the number 
of twenty upon a day. 

Thei brag, and the Quen es^fecially, that ye will leave us 
in the myddest of the truble, and this sche hath of her last 
post which cam by you. My battell to this day hathe bein 
very bitter, but yf ye frustrat my expectation and the pro- 
messe that I have made in your name, I regard not how few 
my dolorus dayes shal be. What God hath wrought by 
me in this mater I will not now wreyte. But this I may say, 
that such offers ar refused, that mo do judge us fooles, 
then do praise our constancye. We ar determined to assay 
the uttermost, but first we must have three thousand mo 
soldiours, for if we assault and be repulsed, then shall our 
enterprise be in great hasard. And our commons are not 
able to abyde together. Geve advertisement theirfor to such as 
friend us, that without delay our support be sent as weall by 
money as by men. 

If your eis be single, ye may not lett to succor our present 
necessitie, whatsoever daunger appear therof to ensew. 

I most farther requyvc you to be a suyttar to all such as 



1559.] l.AUOl US OF JOHN KNOX. 1 ."> 

\ on know to be imfained favourers, and especially to our hiv 
lliren of London, to have a respect to our necessities. 

The French ships keep the narrow waters heir, which is 
to us a great noyance, and unto thame a great relief. Provision 
wold be had by times, which we cannot mack be reason 
that all our ships are absent, and as \ve fear stayed, so many 
as be in France. Mack ye advertisement as ye think good, for 
I cannot write to any especial for lack of opportunity ; 
for in twenty-four hours I have not four or five to natural 
rest and ease of this wicked carcass. Remember my last re- 
quest for my mother,* and say to Mr. George that I have 
nead of a good and an assured horse, for great watch is laid for 
my apprehension, and large money promised till any that 
shall kill me ; and yet wold I ha sard to sum unto you, if I 
wear assured that I myghtbe permitted to open my mouth, 
to call again to Christ Jesus those unthankful children 
who, alice ! have appeared utterly to have forgotten his 
loving mercies, which sometimes I supposed they had em- 
braced. And this part of my care now poured in your bosom, 
I cease farther to truble you, being trubled myself in body 
and in spirit for the trubles that be present and appear to 
grow. God give end to his glory and to our comfort. This 
23 of October, 1559, att midnight. Many things I have to 
write, which now time suffers not, but after if ye mack 
haste with this messaige, ye shall understand more. ... 1 
write with sleeping eec. 

J. K. 
Advertise me if all things sum to your hands close. 

* In a letter of Knox to Sir James Crofts, (Sept. 21, 1559,) he says, 
" One thing must I suite to you, to wit, that either by yourself, or 
ells by Sir Raf Sadleyr .... you would procure a licence for my 
mother, Elizabeth Bows, to visit me, and to remain with me for a 
season." We learn from another letter that she was a widow. Knox's 
father is supposed to have been a retainer of the Earl of Bothwell. 

" Raylton seems to have been a sort of private secretary or clecy- 
pherer." Note in the Sadler Papers. I am more inclined to thin!;. 



1(> SCOTTISH PROCEEDINGS. [OCT. 



SIR RALPH SADLER AND SIR JAMES CROFT, TO SIR 
WILLIAM CECIL.* 

Sir, We wolde be loth to be thought negligent or sloathfull 
in writinge, and therefore, havinge none advertisement at all 
neyther by Randallf ne any others from the Protestants, nor 
of their intents and procedings syns their arryvall at Edin- 
burgh, whereof we do not a litle mervaile, we have iiever- 
theles thought it not amisse to occupie the posts with 
such matier as we can gette by espiell and otherwise by 
common brute. 

That is, that, as we wrote in our last letters, the Duke^ 
and his sone, with sondry other Lordes, as the Prior of St. 
Andre wes, the Erles of Cassells,|| Glencarn,H Monteth,** 

by this letter, that it was a feigned name for somebody in a more con- 
spicuous position. An explanation of some passages of this letter will 
be found in a postscript of one by Sir Ralph Sadler, and Sir James 
Croft, given a little farther on. 

* This letter and the two which follow have already been printed 
among the Sadler papers, from the first draughts, -which differ some- 
what from these present copies taken from the corrected letter sent to 
Cecil. Several others, printed in the book above quoted, are found in 
the Cottonian Library, in a more correct form. 

t Thomas Randolph, or Randall, who sometimes corresponded under 
the assumed name of Barnabie, as may be seen in the Sadler papers, 
was one of the ablest of Elizabeth's agents, and was long employed in 
Scotland. In the course of the present work will be seen many of his 
letters. 

J James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, and Duke of Chatelherault, Re- 
gent of Scotland, until he resigned that post in favour of the Queen- 
dowager in 1555, and received a pension and title from France. He 
afterwards, in 1559, joined the congregation, and was secretly passed 
into Scotland by the aid of Cecil, who also lent him money out of his 
own purse. 

Lord David Hamilton, fourth son of the Duke of Chatelherault. 

|| Gilbert Kennedy, fourth Ear! of Cassilis. 

^j Alexander, fifth Earl of Glencairn. 

** William Graham, fifth Earl of Monteith. 



1559.] SCOTTISH PJUM'KKDlMiS. 17 

Eglinton,* c. : the Lords Rutlivan,t and Maxwell, &c. : 
with five thousand horse, as they say, arrived at Edinburgh, 
on Wednesday the 18th of this present, and after them, as it 
is said, cam four thousand fotemen which they have in wages, 
with a great noinber besides, bruited to be in the hole above ten 
thousand. And also they say that on Saturday last the Erie of 
Argile I arrived there with five thousand. All this we here, but 
we woll not write it for gospel that their power is so great. 
Albeit it is commonly said that they be about fifteen or 
sixteen thousand men, which is like enough to be true. We 
here nothing of the Erie of Huntley more then you know 
already, but some say that his eldest soon the Lord Gordon|| is 
at Edinburgh, with the Protestants, and th'erle Morton also. 
We have it confirmed by sundry reports that since the 
Protestants arrival at Edinburgh there have been dyvers 
hot skirmishes betwixt them and the French, and many 
hurt and slain on both sides, and that Kyrcaldye II is evil 
hurt with the shot of an harquebuss through his left 
shoulder, and a French captain of good reputation slain. 

* Hugh, second Earl of Eglinton, married to Lady Jane Hamilton, 
fourth daughter of the Duke of Chatelherault. 

t Patrick, third Lord Ruthven, whom Knox characterises as " a stout 
man, and discreet in the cause of God." 

t Archibald Campbell, fifth Earl of Argyle. His mother was a 
daughter of the Earl of Iran. 

George, fourth Earl of Huntley. In a subsequent letter, we are told 
that " the Erie of Huntley remains at home in his country like a 
wily fox." 

|| George, Lord Gordon, afterwards fifth Earl of Huntley. 

U Sir James Kirkaldy, Lord of Grange. He was one of those of 
the Protestant party who received direct assistance from England. In 
a letter of Sadler and Croft to the Council, on the 25th of October, (one 
day later than the present,) they say " Like as we wrote to you, there 
have been dyvers skirmishes betwixt the Protestants and the French, 
which daily do continue, with also mighty alarms, and dyvers hurt 
and slain on both syds, but Kirkaldy hath no such hurt as we 
wrote of, the brute whereof did arise of another Scotsman that 
was indeed hurt in the same sort as we did write, and before that in 
the same skirmish Kyrcaldy slew a Frenchman, whereby the Protes- 
tants had the first blood, which they do take for good luck." 
VOL. I. C 



18 SCOTTISH PROCEEDINGS. [OCT. 

So that now tli'iiU'ray is bcgon, and being thus farre entered 
in bloode on both parts, we thinke it cannott be soone 
staunched. The Queue's Majestic hathe more for two thou- 
sand pounds than her Highnes father coulde obteyn for six 
thousand. Whether they woll assaulte the towne of Legh or 
not we cannot tell, but you know the Scotts woll clymbe no 
walles. We trust within a day or twoo to advertise you of 
tlieire doings more certenly. 

And because Randall writeth not, we judge that he woll be 
the first messenger himselfe. 

So we end till we have more matier to write of, and wishe 
you as well as to ourselfes. From Berwick, the 24th of Oc- 
tober, 1559. 

Your assured pore frends, 

R. SADLER.* 
JAMES 



SIR R. SADLER AND SIR J. CROFT TO SIR W. CECIL. 

Yesternight we receyved letters in cipher from Randall, 
with others from tli'erle of Arrayn, alias Beaufort, J to the 

* Sir Ralph Sadler, son of Henry Sadler, Esq. was born at Hackney, 
in Middlesex, and rose to distinction under the patronage of Lord 
Cromwell. He distinguished himself so much at the battle of Pinkie, 
that he was made a knight banneret, and is said to have been the last 
knight banneret of England. He died in 1587, and his monument still 
remains at Standon church, in Hertfordshire. He married Lord Crom- 
well's laundress, whilst her first husband was still living, though at the 
time supposed to be dead in foreign parts. Fuller tells us that this 
Sir Ralph had a pardon of the Pope for the sins of his family for three 
generations to come, which had been obtained for him by another 
person, and which had just expired when Fuller wrote. 

t Sir James Crofts, (sometimes called a Croft,) of Croft Castle, in 
Herefordshire. He was a worthy and valiant knight, and he was em- 
ployed on the borders in Mary's reign. By that Queen he was impri- 
soned on a charge of being implicated in Wyat's treason. Elizabeth 
made him governor of Berwick, and controller of her household. 

J The feigned name which was given to the Earl in his passport, 
which is printed in the Sadler Papers, vol. i. p. 21. 



1559.] THE PROTESTANTS AIDED IVY ELIZABETH. 10 

Queue's Majestic, to you and to us, and also certain other 
writings which we send you here enclosed, praying you 
that upon consideration of the same, we may be directed 
from thence with speed, how we shall answer their desires in 
such sort as to your wisdoms there shall be thought con- 
venyent, for now you may see great likelihood what this 
matter woll grow unto. 

We have in the mean season thought good to put them in 
some hope of such relief as with honour and secrecy may be 
ministered unto them, and also have given them such advise 
as you shall perceive by the copy of our letters presently 
written in cipher to Randall, which you shall receive here- 
with. But surely we thiuke if they be not relieved and sup- 
ported by the Quene's Majestic, their poverty being such as 
they allege, they must of force desist and leave of their en- 
terprise to their own confusion. And if by her Highness 
aid they may prosper and achieve the same, yet in th'ende, 
as far as we can see, her Highness must either manifest her- 
self on that side, or else they shall not be able to strive and 
wrestle with the power of France. Wherein we be bold to 
say our poor minds as men which from the bottom of our 
herts do wish and desire th'establishement of this ileland 
in perpetual unity and concord, the like oportimitye 
whereof, that is now offered, we think we shall not lyve to 
see, if this be pretermitted, the consideration whereof we re- 
far to the wisdom and deep judgment of those to whom 
it chiefly appertains, which can more deeply way it, and 
decern and see further in the same then our poor wits can 
arreche. So we end, committing you to God, who direct- 
eth all to his pleasure. From Berwick, the 27th of Octo- 
ber, 1559. 

Your assured poor friends, 

R. SADLER. 

JAMES CROFT. 

Postscripta. You shall receive amongst the rest, a letter 

c C 



20 LORD OF ORMESTON. [OCT. 

from Knox to Mr. Rayleton,* who before wrote to him to 
gette some knowlege of the greate scale which you lately 
willed us to inquire of, that should be sent out of Fraunce into 
Scotlande. And now you shall perceive what the said Knox 
writeth of the same, which, as he termeth it in his said letters, 
he calleth a Jewell, and by the things ingraved in the staff he 
writeth of, sent to the Regent from her sone and doughter in 
Fraunce, he meaneth the armes of England, Fraunce, and 
Scotland. 






SIR R. SADLER AND SIR JAMES CROFT TO CECIL. 

Yesternyght arrived here the Larde of Ormeston, f with 
thies letters, which we send you here inclosed. He was spe- 
ciallie dispeched hither for money, and declared unto us, that 
onlesse they might be presently holpen and relieved with the 
same, they coulde not kepe their power any longer togither, 
but that their souldiors, which they had in wages, were 
readie to departe from them, for lack of payment, whereuppon 
because we thought it not good utterly to discourage them, 
we have presumed to send them one thousand pounds, which 
we declared unto him, we shifted for of our owne money, and 
such as we could borrowe of our frends for the tyme, and so 

* Alluding- to the letter of Knox which is printed at p. 12. 

t John Cockburn, laird of Ormeston, a zealous reformer. Shortly 
after the laird was waylaid and attacked by the Earl of Bothwell, and 
the money which he had received for the Protestants taken from him. In 
his letter of 3 Nov. in which he announces this mishap, Randolph adds, 
" Immediately after word came to us that Ormeston was hurte, and 
the money lost, th'erle of Arrain and the Lorde James went with two 
hundred horsemen and one hundred footemen, and two pieces of artille- 
rie, to the Lord Bothwell's howse, trusting to have founde him there ; 
howbeit they cam to late onlie by a quarter of an hower. They have, 
notwithstanding, taken his howse ; and onles he render the money oute 
of hande, this daye his howse shall be sett a fyer, and his goods 
reserved, in recompense of the money, and he to be taken as an 
enemye to the whole lords of the congregation." Sadler, i. 536. 



1559.] NECESSITIES OF THE SCOTTISH PROTESTANTS. '21 

we have now written unto Randall, requyering him to declare 
the same to such of the lords there, as he thinks good, and 
to advertise them, that we be in good hope to send them more 
very shortly, praying them to keep it secret, and to make as 
few privy to it, as is possible, whereof likewise we requiered 
the said Ormeston ; to whom also we have given two hun- 
dred crowns, for his own relief, which he toke in very 
thankful part, and so we returned him this day with 
speed to Edinburgh with good words, and good hope of 
more relief, as soon as may be. Furthermore, like as we 
wrote unto you that we would send this berer, Mr. Drurie, to 
Edinburgh, to th'intent we might the better understand by 
him of their doings there, so being directed from me, Sir 
James Croft, to the Prior of St. Andrews, he has been 
there amongst them since Thursday last, and is now re- 
turned unto us in the company of the said Lard of 
Ormeston. He has viewed the town of Lythe very near, 
within the shot of the harquebuss,* and what he judges of 
the same and all the rest that he hath scene and hard there, 
he can better and more at length declare unto you than we 
can write. He is honest, wise, and secret, and therefore we 
have thought good to dispatch him presently herewith, 
praying you to credit him in that he shall declare unto you on 
our behalf. What woll be th'ende of this matier, we cannot 
tell, but surly without the Queue's Majestie's aid, either 
by taking open and plain part with them, or ells secretly 
to be at charges with them, as her Highness hath been for a 
time, we see not, their poverty being such as it is, as this 
said bearer can tell, that they shall be able of themselves to 
keep any power long together, but of force must be fain to 
stay and depart to their no little tangier, and to the utter 
overthrow of the hole intended purpose. And what may 

* In the first draught of this letter,, the writer here goes on to give 
Ormeston's opinion of the great strength of the fortifications of Leith, 
but the sentence is afterwards erased, as a matter which would be 
better told by the bearer of the letter, as he here goes on to say. 



SIEGE OF LEITH. [OCT. 

ensue therof, we referre to be considered there, by suche as 
can more depelie waye and judge of the same, then we can, 
and for our parts shal be readie to doo as we shall be com- 
manded.* And thus we committ you to the tuition of Al- 
mightie God. From Barwick, the last of October, at mid- 
night, 1559. 

Your assured poore frends, 

R. SADLER. 

JAMES CROFT. 

* During the latter part of this year, the Scottish reformers made- 
head with difficulty against the French faction, and were only covertly 
aided by England. " But as soone as it was once knowne that the 
Marquesse of Albeuf, the Queene of Scot's uncle, leavyed forces by 
meanes of the Rheingrave in Germany for the Scottish warre, that 
pieces of great ordnance were conveyed to the ports, that greater pro- 
visions were made than necessary to suppresse a fewe unarmed Scots, 
(for this was pretended,) that the Frenchmen also promised the Danish 
king (to the end to draw him to their party) that the Duke of Loraine 
should resigne his claime to the kingdome of Denmarke, and that 
they again more importunately urged the Bishop of Rome's censure 
against the Queene, and his sentence declaratory for the Queene of 
Scot's title to England ; Sir Ralph Sadleir, a wise man, was sent to 
the borders of Scotland, to be assistant by his counsell to the Earle of 
Northumberland, warden of the Middle March, and to Sir James a 
Crofts, governor of Barwick. For to what end these things tended, 
the councell could not see, unlesse to invade England, and to pro- 
secute that by warre, which by titles and armes they made shew of." 
So Camden. On the 16th Dec., William Winter, with the navy, was 
sent to station himself in the Frith ; on the 27th Feb. following, a 
treaty of mutual support was made by the Duke of Norfolk with the 
Scottish lords, and on the 26th of March, the English army, under Lord 
Grey, (who had been made warden of the Middle and East Marches,) 
entered Scotland. The French, disconcerted by the measures of the 
English government, expostulated, persuaded, treated ; but Cecil was 
not to be deceived, the siege of Leith was persisted in, and in the end 
the French were compelled to give up their enterprise. 



1559.] CONDUCT OF TIIK SPANIARDS. 23 

SIR THOMAS CHALONER TO CECIL. 

(Dated Bruxelles, Dec. 6, 1559. ) 

" I must tell you," quoth he,* " that of late four thousand 
crowns were surprised by the French, sent for the relief of 
the Scots ; that whatsoever you make, that the Queen did not 
know thereof, and that it was a portion sent by Monsieur 
Cecil the Secretary, you cannot make the French to believe 
it, for how can they think that Cecil had so much to spare, 
but rather persuade themselves that the rebels are covertly 
maintained by the Queen. And thus you know,"- quoth he, 
" as much as I do therein. But now to the point," saith he, 
" where you require th to consider the sequel of the French en- 
terprise might tend to the danger of ours. I confess," quoth 
he, " it is true what you say. But first, to speak somewhat of 
the King my master, it is evident what sincere affection he 
had borne to the Queen, offering himself to her in manage, 
standing between her and the danger of her life, namely, 
sending one time Johan d'Ayala unto to her to protest that 
she should better regard the state of her life, but now being 
fair of, although he could not doe the semblably, yet he 
would be very sorry any sinister adventure should chance 
unto her, seeing, as you say, the vicinity should put us in 
remembrance of our own cause. But when the King, having 
discharged the office of a neighbour and friend, shall see his 

* The Bishop of Arras. This extract from a letter of Sir Thomas, 
giving an account of a conversation he had had with that minister on 
the affairs of Scotland, shows the false game which the Spaniards were 
playing towards England, who, while they pretended to feel an in- 
terest for the Queen, were aiding the designs of the French in Scot- 
land by their cunning representations of the weakness of the English, 
and exhortations to keep aloof from intermeddling. Had it not been 
for Cecil, these representations would probably have hindered Eliza- 
beth from interfering openly. It was with the utmost difficulty that 
Cecil prevailed. Fortunately, the Spaniards, while they endeavoured 
to deceive the English as to their own strength, deceived themselves. 



24 ELIZABETH'S UNWILLINGNESS TO INTERFERE. [1559. 

premonition not esteemed, what resteth ells unto him then 
to provide some other waies for him ? One thing assure 
yourselfe, that for your quarrel the King will not breake his 
peace with France. If you will not provide for yourselfe, 
the King must be driven to looke to his owne indempnitie, el 
pourveoir a ses affaires, by all meanes he can." This clause 
somewhat altered, I remember he repeateth three or four times. 
" But it is strange," quoth he, " that you beleeve the world 
knoweth not your weaknes. I demande what store of cap- 
taines or men of warre have you ? What treasure, what fur- 
niture for defence ? What hold in England able to endure 
the breath of a cannon one daie ? Your men, I coiifesse, are 
valiant, but without discipline. But admitte you had disci- 
pline, what should it avayle in division ? The people a little 
removed from London are not of the Queene's religion. The 
nobles repine at it, and we are not ignorant, that of late some 
of them conspired against her." 



CECIL TO QUEEN ELIZABETH. * 

It may please your most Excellent Majesty, With a sor- 
rowfull harte and w r atery eies, I your poore servant and most 
lowlye subject, an unworthy Secretory, besech your Majesty 
to pardon this my lowlye suite, that considering the pre- 
ceding in this matter for removing of the French out of Scot- 
land doth not content your Majesty, and that I cannot 
with my conscience gyve any contrary advise, I may, with 
your Majestic' s favor and clemency, be spared to entermeddle 
therein. And this I am forced to doo of necessitie, for I will 
never be a minister in any your Majestie's service, whereunto 
your owne mynd shall not be agreable, for thereunto I am 

* We have many documents which bear testimony to the extreme 
reluctance with which the Queen consented to give open aid to the 
Protestant party in Scotland. The following is printed from a draught 
in Cecil's own hand, preserved among the Lansdowne MSS. It is not 
dated. 



1560.] ELIZABETH'S UNWILLINGNESS TO INTERFERE. 25 

sworn, to be a minister of your Majesty's determinations and 
not of mine own, or of others, though they be never so 
many. And on the other part to serve your Majesty in any 
thing that myself cannot allow, must needs be an unprofit- 
able service, and so untoward, as therein I wold be loath your 
Majesty should be deceived. And as for any other service, 
though it were in your Majesty's kitchen or garden, from the 
bottom of my heart I am ready without respect of estimation, 
welthe, or ease, to doo your Majesty's commandment to my 
lyve's end. Whereof I wish with all my poor sorrowful hart, 
that your Majesty would make some proof, for this I doo 
affirm, that I have not had sense your Majesty's reign, any 
one daye's joy, but in your Majesty's honour and weal. 



DE LA BROSSE AND THE BISHOP OF AMIENS TO THE 
CARDINAL OF LORRAINE AND THE DUKE OF GUISE.* 

(From Edinb. 27 March, 1559.) 

My lords, for that the Queen Dowagier hath answered 
you at large to these two letters which she hath received 
(which is all that we have received from you since the 
coming of Octavian,f) we will use none other repetition; 

* Translation of an intercepted letter, of which the original is pre- 
served in MS. Cot. Calig. B. ix. foal 956, along with some others of the 
same date, perhaps those mentioned by the council to Cecil and Wot 
ton in the June following, who send " certain interceptyd letters 
sent by you, Mr. Secretary, to be deciphered by Mr. Comer." Lodge, 
i. 316. This letter is dated in the original, according to the French 
way of reckoning, March 27, 1560. 

t An Italian, native of Milan, who had come over with a re-inforce- 
meant from France, and on whose arrival the French began to fortify 
Leith. Cecil, on the 24th of August, writes to Sir Ralph Sadler, 
" The French were embarked the 20th of this month, being in number 
14 sails, but as yet I have no knowledge certain of there passing by. 
There is 1000 pikes, and 1000 harquebusiers. One Octavian, an old 
Milliner of this court, hath cheff chardge." He arrived in the latter 
part of August. But he seems to have passed backwards and for- 
wards more than once. 



26 THE DUKE OF NORFOLK. [MARCH, 

and also for that Mons. de Ville Parisis* writeth unto you at 
good length as well of the state of the fortifications as of 
victualls in that behalfe. 

And accordinge to that that it hath pleased you to write by 
one of your letters, I, La Brosse,f truste to departe within 
these fower daies, and for that purpose have sent to the 
Duke of Norfolk,| who lieth in the borders, to be assured of 
iny passage, although 1 have the Quene his mistris conduct. 
Yet, thus much have I thought good to advertise you of par- 
ticularly, that there is nothing forgotten of all that hath 
bene possible, to put the Quene of England out of suspition 
to enter into the warre, and to satisfie the rebells who have 
ever stood stiffe as they doe yet, to se the French Kinge with- 
out fortification and men of his nation in this realme. 

My lords, the Quene Dowagier hath written to you for 
the expedition of the bishoprick of Rosse in the favoure of the 
Deane of Glascowe, who is president of the session. His 
age, very greate and deepe learninge, do certifie enough of 
hym. Whereof we would not fayle to beare witnes unto you, 
and to tell you that he is well affectioned, and very necessary 
on this side. The Bishoprick is yet whole. 

Since the writing hereof, the trumpet is returned from the 
Duke of Norfolk, and bririgeth me word that the said Duke 



* Mons. d'Oisel. 

f La Brosse, a French knight., accompanied by Pelleuce, Bishop of 
Amiens, and two thousand foot, arrived at Leith at the end of Septem- 
ber. The Bishop brought with him some doctors of the Sorbonne, 
who gave out that they were come to dispute with the preachers of 
the congregation. " The Bishop," says Sir Ralph Sadler on the 29th 
of Sept., " as they say, cometh to curse, and also to dispute with the 
Protestants, and to reconcile them, if it wol be." 

J Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk, was sent to the border 
as lieutenant-general of the north. 

Henry Sinclair, who was made president of the session in 1544; 
and Dean of Glasgow in 1550. He died in 1565, and was succeeded by 
Lesly, so famous in the history of this reign. 



150*0.] SIEGE OF LEIT1I. 27 

will not give me surety of my passport till he shall have 
first advertised his mistress thereof. I know not what will 
come of it. 

You promised and assured me before my departure, and 
also since by a letter, which it hath pleased you, my Lord 
Cardinal, to write hither, that my nephew should have an 
offer of a counsaylor whereof he has not yet his depeche, 
as it is written unto me. I know not whereon he or I have 
offended that he hath it not* 



THE QUEEN DOWAGER OF SCOTLAND TO D'OISEL.f 

Since the arrival of the enemy to Leith, I have heard 
nothing from you. I have sent divers to you, and have 
learned that they have been all taken in going, if a gen- 
tleman of the Lord Seaton's be not entered, by whom I have 
written largely unto you. 

The negotiation is broken upon the coming of the 
English, because our folks will not or cannot leave of, and 
it is now eight days since they went hence. 

The Queen of England continues her dissimulations : 
but for all that, the King rests not so much thereupon, but 
that he hath advertised the King of Spain thereof, who 
hath promised to let him have ships and victuals. The 
King in the mean time hath caused four and twenty 
great ships to be armed to be sent hither, with other force, 
which he causes to be made ready. This is the substance 
of a letter sent to the Bishop of Valence, t Again, the cipher 

* Some words are inserted in this translation which I have omitted, 
because it is not very clear what they are, and they have nothing 
answering to them in the original. 

t D'Oisel was at this time closely besieged in Leith by the English 
and the Scottish Protestants. This is an intercepted letter ; the original 
is preserved in MS. Cotton. Calig. B. ix. foal. 986. Date, May 5, 1560. 

t John de Montluc, Bishop of Valence, who had before been am- 
bassador in Scotland, in 1553 



28 DEATH OF THE QUEEN REGENT. [JUNE, 

is very dangerous, for within these two dayes one hath shewed 
me a translation in Scottish language, made word for word, of 
the letter which I receaved by one of the three wayes of the 
19th of February, wherein there is so much spoken of the 
castle, and of the temporising with the rebells againe. 

That which is written by Mr. Baptist is in goode earnest ; 
and I pray you to send me the remedie. I have sent fower 
hundred crownes to Sier Sarlabos at two tymes within these 
tenn dayes before. 

Loke upon the memoriall which is even now sent to me, 
touching the enterprise of the enemy, whose purpose was 
yester eveninge to make theire trench on the north side of the 
water, right against the citadell, to the intent to myne the 
said citadell. 

A man, of late, which arrived from London, hath promised 
to the Lord Grey to separate, within three dayes and nights, 
the newe bulwark of St. Anthonie from the towne, so as it 
shal be easie for them to assayle the rest of the towne ; wher- 
fore provide for it on that side. The Lord Grey vaunteth that, 
by Munday or Tuesday night, which shal be the 6 or 7 day 
of May, he will enter into the towne, or it shall cost him many 
of his men, and their meneing is to give the assault at the 
breake of day. They have requyred that the Lords, Lards, and 
Scotts gentlemen take every one of them an English gentleman 
of like degree by the hand when they goe to the assault. 



LORD CLINTON* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My good Lord, the newis that ar come synce your lordship's 
departure, is off the deth of the Quene Dowager of Scottland,f 

* Edward, ninth Lord Clinton, created in 1572 Earl of Lincoln. 
He was appointed Lord High Admiral by Queen Mary, and was con- 
firmed in that office by Elizabeth, on her accession. He married thrice, 
his third wife being Lady Elizabeth Fitzgerald, celebrated in song by 
Lord Surrey as the ' fair Geraldine.' 

t She died on the eleventh of June, according to a letter of Cecil 
printed in Lodge. 



1500.] DEPREDATIONS BY THE TURKS. ^9 

which is written from my lord of Norfolk's grace. The lose of 
twenty-seven galleys and thirty great ships of the king of 
Spaynesmthis voyage of Trypolie, which are taken by Dracont,* 
first lieutenant to the Turk. The Duke of Medyna Cely 
forced to fly in to a small hole newly fortified in those parts 
by the Spaniards, with seven soldiers in his company, which 
are all that is left of twenty thousand, the rest slain and takyn 
by the said Dracont. And it is thought that for lack of vital 
the said Deuk of Medyna shall be distressed ere the sucours 
from Spain may come to him. We here nothing of any con- 
clusion between Mr. Secretary,f Mr. Wotton, and the French, 
for that they are but now newly met But the lykelihod is 
great of a good conclusion very shortly. The French in Leth 
are in great penury, which is certainly advertised hither. 
When more shall come to my knowledge, I will advertise 
your Lordship. God grant you long lyff in much honour. 
From the corte, the 17th of June, 1560. 

Your Lordship's assured to command, 

E. CLINTON. 

* The persecution raised by King Philip drove the Moors of Spain 
to rebellion, and they were aided by their brethren of Africa, who in- 
fested the seas, and did much hurt to the shipping of the Christians. 
Dragut, a native of Natolia, and a person of mean birth, had raised 
himself in the Turkish service to be a great admiral, and had long 
been the terror of Italy and the Mediterranean. He had fortified Tri- 
poli, and made it his head quarters. When Philip returned from the 
Netherlands, he fitted out an expedition under the Duke of Medina 
Celi against Tripoli and the isle of Garb, while Dragut was absent. 
Garb was taken, and the Spaniards lost their time in fortifying it, in- 
stead of hastening to Tripoli. In the mean time Dragut, aided by a 
great fleet from the Sultan Solyman, came upon them and destroyed 
their fleet. The Duke, with part of the fleet, did not fly to Garb, but 
escaped under cover of the night, and returned to Spain. Garb, 
which was held by Don Alvaro de Sand, was immediately besieged 
by the infidels. 

f Cecil, who was in Scotland with Dr. Wotton, to negotiate with the 
French commissioners, for the evacuation of Scotland by the French 
troops. 



30 M-KJOTIATIONS AT EDINBURGH. [JUNE, 

CECIL TO QUEEN ELIZABETH. 

It niaye please your most excellent Majesty, sence our 
common letters of the 19th, wherin we declared how farr we 
had preceded to that tyme, we fynd that this abstynence 
hath doone us much good divers wayes. The strength 
of the towne hath bene quyetly and truely viewed ; there 
hath bene also meanes used to drawe some speciall men 
owt of the towne from the French; and at this present 
I perceyve the men of warr make litle dowt of wynning- 
the towne, having the army here to besege it. Neverthe- 
less, I and Mr. Wotton take another waye, and meane to ob- 
teyne that by treaty with a peace to follow, that others wold 
by loss of bloode, with a warr to follow. We dowt not but to 
obteyne all reasonable things saving suerty towards both 
these realmes, and such is tire case being betwixt a prynce 
and subjects, as we knowe not ho we to provide for suerty of 
subjects agaynst all adventures, without such dishonor to the 
Prynce asneyther wilbe graunted, nor can be reasonably de- 
manded for subjects. I assure your Majesty, these cases be 
marveloose difficult to resolve, and yet considerynge I knowe 
the French mallice, and am wholly addict to your Majesties 
honor and suerty, I wold not yeld so much to the French 
Queue's honor in behalf of her subjects, if your coffers wer full 
to mayiiteane but one yere's warr, such wold be your honor, 
conquest, and suerty. Our gretest difficulties at this present 
will stand uppon continuance of the leage betwixt your Ma- 
jestie and this realme, wherin I fynde the Scottes so peremp- 
tory, as they will stand fast therto that they will never accord 
to breake it of there part. Within two dayes it will appeare 
what shall insew thereof, for I see the French be as peremp- 
tory, so that except the moderation come of our part, I see no 
hope of accord. Thus much I am bold to trouble your Majestic 
in this matter. I understand by Mr. Petre's letters,f that your 

* Sir William Petre, chancellor of the garter, and a principal se- 
cretary of state during the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., Mary, 
and Elizabeth. He died in 1571. 



l;j()0.] INTERNAL STATE OF -FRANCE. 3 1 

Majesty wold have me consider the advertisements owt of 
France brought by Mr. Joones, wlierin I am to seek what to 
write, for I thynk they be such things as are brought to 
your ambassador to content him, but how certain they be I 
know not, and upon uncertentyes I can not advise any 
certain counsel. I thynk suerly France is disturbed,* 
but I see not lykelihode of continuance, for either lack 
will be in the author's being but popular to continue, or 
else remedy will be in the rulors, rather to yield in some 
part, and so to dissolve the conjunction of nombers 7 than 
to less there outward things by inward contention. The 
offer made of certain towns in Britain and Normandy likes 
me well, and the same wold be so allowed, but I can not 
give your Majesty counsel to embr ass things so fair of. No 
strength is tenable that is far distant, nether behooves it that 
the crown of England should enter into war with suerty of all 
Britain. Profitable it is for the time to divert the enemy 
by procuring him bussyness at home. 

If it should not please God to give us his grace to make 
a peace presently, (whereof I wold be sorry,) there be many 
ways to offend your enemy withal, without great chardge, 
whereof I will forbear now to write, because I doo bend 
myself to peace. This aftemoone, Mr. Wotton and I should 
have herd the French and Scots artillery, I should say art 
cles of there treaty, but they be so long in planting, as I thynk 
it will be to-morrow in the morning before the battery will shoot 
of. The French seek all the ways they can to putt a jelosy 
in the Scots of us, so as we see what they shoot at; 
werein if there were not more trust that the matters wold keep 
them asonder and us together, than in any certenty of the 
nation of Scotland, I wold fear more then I doo. But suerly 
the hatred to the French is such, and the causes so many, 
the benevolence at this time towards England is so great, 
and that with such desert, as I see not that in long time the 

* The religious troubles in France were just beginning. 



X-2 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [JUNE, 

French shall recover the inynde of Scottishmen agaynst us as 
in tymes past hath bene. Sence the Queue's deth, here be 
none in Scotland that dare openly shew favor to the French. 
The Bishopps that be most offended, dare not shew any 
countenance to theis men, ne dare come out of the castle for 
hatred of the common people. We did offer to the Archbishop 
of St. Androos,* a gard to come to the ambassador's, but he 
durst not, and so the French ambassador went into the castell 
to hym and others. I will no more molest your Majesty, but 
use my contynuall prayer, that God wold direct your hart to 
procure a father for your children, and so shall the children of 
all your realme bless your sede. Nether peacenor warr with- 
out this will profitt us long. Which, in the name of God, (I am 
now a precher,) I humbly besech your Majestic to consider 
earnestly, for otherwise suerly God will require a sharp ac- 
compt at your hand, for 'your time lost, and the danger of 
bloodshed of your miserable people. I trust of your Ma- 
jestie's pardon. From Edenburgh, the 21st of June, at four of 
clock in the afternoone, 1560. 

Your Majestie's humble subject and unworthy servant, 

W. CECILL. 



SIR NICHOLAS THROGMORTONf TO CECIL. 

If I should discourse particularly unto you what these menj 

have done since my last letters, which were of the 7th, you 

would think me as fond in observing their doings as they mad 

in variable executing. But you may see what force fear hath, 

* John Hamilton, natural son of James, first Earl of Arran, who had 
been made Abbot of Paisly in 1525. He was taken prisoner in Dum- 
barton Castle, and hanged at Stirling, April 1, 1570. 

t Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was the fourth son of Sir George Throg . 
morton, of Lough ton in Warwickshire. He was employed for several 
years, first in France, and afterwards in Scotland. He was afterwards 
made Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and chief butler of England. He 
died in 1570. 

J The French. 



l~)i)0.] TKorJJLKS IN FRANCE. 33 

that occasioned such variety. One day they prepare apace 
to send great force into Scotland, and their captains and men 
of charge run to and fro ; the next day all is countermanded* 
They be in such security, as no man knows overnight where 
the King will lodge. To-morrow from all parts they have 
such news as doth greatly perplex them. Every day new ad- 
vertisemens of new stirs, as of late again in Dauphiny, in 
Anjou, in Provence, and to make up their mouths, the King 
being in the skirts of Normandy, at Roan, upon Corpus 
Christi day there was somewhat to do about the solemn pro 
cession, so as there was many slain in both parts, but at length 
the churchmen had the worse, and for an advantage, the 
order is by the King commanded that the priests for their 
outrage shall be grievously punished. What judge you when 
the Cardinal of Lorraine is constrained to command to 
punish the clergy, and such as do find fault with others in- 
solency, contemning the reverent usage to the holy proces- 
zion. You shall be better able to judge of these men's credits 
by such late printed books as herewith I send you. 

I am sorry the way to come into Leith and to go from thence 
is so open ; for here is one arrived, named Vincent, of whose 
enterprise I did long ago advertise, that hath, as he braveth, 
been in Leith lately, and delivered thirty barrels of powder 
and ten thousand crowns, and in the execution of his enter- 
prise saith he did sink some of your victuallers. These men 
say now your siege is a la voUe. 

The 21st of this month advertisement came to this court 
of the Dowager of Scotland's death ; immediately whereupon 
they here sent to the sea with diligence : and yet till that 
time all things were stayed, and their forces and provisions 
erst prepared for that purpose were countermanded. Where- 
upon it rises, whether they fear some mischance in Scotland 
by her death, and therefore will seek to prevent it by esta- 
blishing a governor there in time ; or whether it be, that they 
hear of some extremity of their men in Leith, demanding pre- 
sent aid ; or whether they see at this time any advantage upon 

VOL. i. D 



34 FRENCH DESIGNS ON SCOTLAND. [JUNE, 

the Queen's Majesty's navy, either to be out of their way, or 
to be retired out of the Firth, and therefore assure themselves 
of free passage through, I know not. But howsoever they 
send, T think it can be no great matter, because of their 
last, yea and perhaps that order may be broken too ere this 
letter come, to your hands. And yet I thought good to let 
you know this much hereof, praying in case you be yet in the 
North, that you will advertise the Duke of Norfolk and Mr. 
Winter* thereof, to the intent they may provide for their 
coming, for this determination holding, they shall shortly 
hear of them. If you be at the court, then it shall be well 
done, that my Lord Admiralf have also knowledge thereof from 
you. 

There is some bruit that the Almains^ do begin to as- 
semble, which doth perplex these men ; and the rather for 
that they fear the displeased number at home will conjoin 
with them. 

Sir, I have proved a true prophet, for since the 27th of 
May, which time you departed from the court, I never re- 
ceived letter nor word forth of England. 

I am now at the town, where the antient famous religous 
Druids made their chiefe abode. 

Sir, the parson of Roxborough, named Car, passed from 
Scotland through England by a lend conduct, full fraught 
from thence, and is here arived, and hath been a good time 
past. I have spoken of him in my other letters. He assureth 
the Earls of Huntley, Mareschal, || Bothwell, Cassills, Mont- 
rose,H and many other noblemen to be heartily French ; 

* William Winter, afterwards knighted, and made vice-admiral, 
t Lord Clinton- 

* The Germans, who bore good will to the French Protestants. 

Dreux, in Normandy, whose name has by some been supposed to 
be derived from that of the Druicls. 

II William fourth Earl of Marischal. He took no very decided part 
in the troubles of Scotland during the reign of Mary. 

IT William Graham, second Earl of Montrose, who died in 1571. 



1560.] CONDUCT OF THE SPANIARDS. .'35 

the whole clergy to be of the same affection. The whole 
Marches and Tyvedale, by the means of the Lord Hume, the 
Cars, and Boughcleugh's,* to be assuredly at the French de- 
votion. He hath (as he saith) brought letters with him, 
signed with their hands, with overture of great things. How- 
soever you do, retain the Prior of Saint Andrews to the Eng- 
lish ; for these men mean once again to attempt to win him 
away ; for this subtle priest saith in him consists all. The 
Cardinal's letter to the Pope for the Provincial Council in 
France, and some other things you must forbear to know 
ledge of until you repair to the court. 

I am in a way to discover a dangerous practise intended 
against her Majesty and her government; but I find mazes in 
it, and therefore must follow my bottom of thread. I fear 
it will prove as evil a matter as the Cardinal Pole's. 

The Spaniards f be as loath to have any league betwixt 
England and Scotland as the French, and therefore, you can 
consider how much it imports her majesty to keep that 
league entire, and for nobody's pleasure to dissolve it, for at 
length you shall see thereabouts will be the sticking on all 
sides : and so the French and Spaniards may win the dis- 
solving thereof. They care for nothing else, for a little time, 
they say, will repair all other matters, if that be broken. I 
am greatly abused, so that league be well and mutually ob- 
served, if any one amity prove so necessary, so safe, and pro 
fitably for England, for in rerum nature it must be so. 

Thus I humbly take my leave of you, praying you to 



* The Hums, the Cares of Fairnyhirst, and the. Scots of Bus 
eletigh, had long been famous for their depredations on the English 
borders 

fin Cecil's journal, we have a notable example of the duplicity of the 
Spaniards on this occasion. " March 10. M. de Glason [the Spanish 
envoy] came and joined with the Bishop of Aquila to move revocation 
of the army out of Scotland, but Glason, privately to my Lord Admiral 
and me, the secretary, counselled us to the contrary." 

I) !> 



,36 NEGOTIATIONS IN SCOTLAND. [JUNK, 

make my hearty commendations to Mr. Wotton. From 
Dreux, the 24th of June, 1560.* 

Yours to use at command, 

N. THROGHMORTON. 



B. HAMPTON TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My duty humblie remembered to your good Lordeship, 
bycause Mr. Petre doth (I am sure) write unto you at good 
length, of the state of things in the north, and of such other 
matters as hath passed there since your Lordshipp's depar- 
ture, f I will for this tyme forbeare to trouble you with the re- 
petitions thereof, the rather for that untill this tyme we here 
not of any conclusion of the treatie in Scotland, althoughe 
the commissioners have met sundrie tymes about the same, 
and whereunto it will growe it can yet be hardly judged. But 
as sone as th'ende thereof, either one waye or other, shall 
be knowne,! will notfayle to move the Queue's Majestic that 
the same may be with diligence signified unto your Lord- 
shipp, either from her Highnes self, or from my Lords, or 
otherwise as shall stande with her pleasure. 

This bearer hath now his full discharge from hence. The 
Bishop of Kyldare]: hathbyn spoken with all, and promysseth 

* The letter is endorsed as having been received in Edinburgh on 
the 2nd of July, so that it must have come much more speedily than 
the news of the Queen's death had been carried to France. 

f The Earl of Sussex landed in Ireland on the 25th June, 1560. 

J Alexander Creek, B. D. was nominated to the bishopric of Kill 
dare by privy seal, dated Greenwich, 17th May, 15(50. "We are 
pleased and contented that the same Alexander, for his better en- 
couragement to take this vocation upon him, and to discharge the 
duty belonging thereunto, shall have also, with the said bishop 
rick, in manner of augmentation and of a commendam, the deanery of 
St. Patricke's, now being in our disposition in like sort as the late 
bishop of Kildare had." " The Queen," observes Mr. Monk Mason 
in his history of St Patrick's, " as appears by her letter, was ignorant 
of the real constitution of this church ; and, it is probable, that the 



15GO.] IRELAND. KARL OF SUSSEX. 37 

to take the bishopric upon him, and to repair shortly 
over. Mr. Attorney having bin divers times sent for to re- 
pair hither to speak with my Lords, and the matter being 
hitherto differed, by his business and other occasions, is now 
in th'ende written unto to repair hither immediately upon 
the finishing of his circuit, and then it is meant he shall 
forthwith be sent over, and before that time it cannot be. 

The signet for Ireland is delivered to this board and 
sealed with the signet here. It is not so well made, in 
mine opinion, as it might have bin, and yet the hast in 
sending it away suffers it not to be new mended. The 
letter to the Chamberlain and other officers of Chester for 
the suffering of your Lordshipp's provisions to pass without 
custom, was signed by the Quene's Majestic before your Lord 
shipp's departure, and delivered out of my hands, either to 
your Lordship yourself, or to sum of your folks, as I 
take it. 

It may, therefore, like you to cause it to be sought for, 
and in case it be not forthcoming, upon knowledge there- 
of, I shall solicit another. Thus my leave humbly taken, 
I committ your good Lordeship to the tuition of Almighty 
God. From Grenewich, the 29th of June, 1560. 

Your good Lordeshippe's humbly to command, 

B. HAMPTON. 



LORD ROBERT DUDLEY* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 
My good Lord, I most heartily thank you for your gentle 
and friendly remembrances. I am right glad to hear your 

interval between this and the time the letters patent were passed, was 
employed in Craike's election, for in the patent he is mentioned as 
Dean 'de facto/ Creek was consecrated in his own cathedral by 
Hugh Curwin, Archbishop of Dublin, and obtained orders for restitu- 
tion of the temporalities on the 22d of August." Creek died in 1564. 
Walter Harris remarks that, in the short space of three years and three 
months, he did more mischief to the see of Kildare than his successors 
were ever able to repair. 

* The celebrated Earl of Leicester. 



:JH TREATY OF EDINBURGH. [JULY, 

Lordship aryved so well in that countrey. The newes of 
the north ar now growne to perfection, for there is a peace 
concluded and agreed uppou. The artycles I cannot yet send 
your Lordship, but yt is sayd veary honorable for her Ma- 
jestie: this much, of much; first all things shall rest betwene 
France and Scotland, as yt was before the broyll, without 
loss or forfeiture of any man's office or goods. They shall 
ellect a number of the noblemen to governe the state with- 
out any Frenchmen. The French shall further give over 
ther holds, Lyeth shall be demolyshed, the Frenche shall de- 
parte into France out of hand, saving ther shall remayne in 
Dimbarre fifty or sixty Frenchmen, and in Inskyth as many, 
except yt be otherwyse ordered by a parliament begun 
the 12th of this moneth. Certayne allowance shall be made 
to the Scotts for payment of their victuallys and other 
chardges they have bene at, &c;, for us a perfect peace con- 
cluded betweene France, Scotland, and us for ever, yf yt will 
last. And so all armour and weapon layd asyde. Thus I 
send you the first of sertenty we have received from thens. 
And so all things being as you left them, saving my Lorde 
of Pembroke, who is yet very weake, I take leave of your 
Lordship with my most harty commendations to your self 
and my good lady and syster, your wyff. At Grenewich, this 
llth of July. 

At your Lordship's commaundement, 

R. DUDDLEY. 



WM. HONNING TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

[To the right honorable and my singuler good Lorde th'erle of Sussex, the 
Quene's Majestie's Lieutenante of her Highnes Realme of Ireland.] 

Pleases it your good Lordship, after humble and due 
remembrances, to be advertised, the Vicecounte Mountague* 

* " The Lord Montague is revoked from Spain, and Sir Thomas 
Chamberlain left as Ledger there." Letter to the Earl of Shrewsbury, 
May 16, 1560, in Lodge. Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague. 






1560.] NEW BISHOPS. :iJ) 

(saith Don John Pacheco) departed King Phillipp's court 
before his coming thens two days, but not yet ary ved, for 
that he comes the lunge seas. This Don John Pacheco, 
who at his first accessee joined with the Bishop of Aquila, 
has taken his leave ; the world says he came to encourage 
the peace concluded, and so was rather to congratulate it then 
to do his intended mesage. 

Dr. May, deane of Pole's,* is now resolutely appointed to 
the sea of York. Mr. Alley, f a joly preacher, has Exeter, 
and with the same, for the tenuitie of that living, a promo 
tion or two for five years, like as Mr. Parkehurst,! clerk 
of Norwich, has alike for three years to enable him the 
better to the payment of the first fruits. 

Nowresteth all the talk here of a little progress to Ports 
mouth, and of the King elect of Sweden, brother to the late 

Camden calls him " a man of singular wisdom, but most devoted to 
the Romish religion, and one that in that respect would be the more 
welcome to the Spaniards." 

* Dr. May, who had been restored to his deanery of St. Pal's in 1559, 
when the bishoprics were filled with Protestants. Several of the 
sees had been J^ft temporarily vacant, and particularly that of York. 
The nomination of May at this time seems to have been done at the 
suggestion of Cecil, who, on his way to Scotland, writes from Scroby 
to Sir William Petre (June 4, 1560) : " I perceive great lack hereaway 
of a bishop of York. I think if you wold move her Majesty, she 
wold pass the congee d'eslyer for Dr. May ; suerly the sooner it be 
done the better." (Haines, p. 323). Dr May died before he was 
consecrated, and was buried at St. Pal's on the 12th of August of this 
same year. 

t William Alley, of King's College, Cambridge, who being a re- 
former, had lived during Mary's reign in privacy, wandering about 
the north of England, and practising physic for a livelihood. He was 
consecrated bishop of Exeter, July 14, 15GO, and had the temporalities 
given him on the 26th August. See Wood. 

John Parkhurst, was consecrated Bishop of Norwich on the first 
of Sept. 1560. He had lived in exile at Zurich during the reign of 
Mary. He was a great writer of Latin epigrams. 



-10 LONDON NEWS. [.JULY, 

Duke John latelie here ; great preparations is made for his 
honorable receipt.* 

I thinke your Lordshippe hath herde of the deathe of the 
poore Lorde Audeley,-|- (yf so I maye be bolde to terme 
hym). I think a shreude wiff, the relicte of a merchaunt 
of London, sett hym forward, from whome, besyds her shreud- 
nes, he did not atteyne the welth he loked for. 

Th'erle of Penbroke J is at Henden, and as yet dare not 
the physicians assure his recovery. The Countysse of Bed- 
ford is brought abed at Exeter of a daughter. 

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton hathe of late for some argument 
of favour a pattent of forty pounds' land well graunted in a tyme 
of her Highnes present great charges. And because I have sene 
a page of the chamber, one Russell, contented to serve in the 
chappell, I remember the olde Justice Mountague desendinge 
from the bench to the comon plees, saied it was warmer in 
the kichen then in the hall. By reason of the contynuance 
of the foule wether universall for Germany and England and 
Fraunce, to the rottinge of there grapes and not ripinge, corne 
hath byn at 6s. the busshell here in some parties, but fallen 
half in half at a second markett. 

About a moneth or five weekes paste, after that the Turque 
had somewhat prevayled at Jarby against Kinge Phillippe's 

* Eric the Fourteenth, King of Sweden, at this time offered his 
hand to the Queen, and was believed to be on his way to England. 
John duke of Finland was Eric's brother, and had been sent by the 
late King Gustavus, their father, to negotiate the marriage. 

The prospect of so close an alliance with that country naturally 
made people curious about its history, and among other tracts on the 
subject we have one, by George de Corth, printed Oct. 28, 1561, en- 
titled, " The Description of Swedland, Gotland, and Finland," and 
dedicated " To the ryght woorshipfull and hys syngular good mayster, 
Mayster Thomas Steuckley, Esquire." 

t George Touchet, lord Audley. His wife was, according to the 
peerages, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Bryan Tuke, Knt. Treasurer of 
the Chamber to Hen. VIII. 

$ William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, grand master of the house- 
hold to Queen Elizabeth. 



15(>0.] FOREIGN NEWS. BAJAZET. 41 

army, * certaiiie Turques, about a thousand men, came 
ne'er Nice, where the Duke of Savoy lay, and between it 
and Vyllefraiik, being six hundred in ambush, made show 
and skirmish of four hundred, whereby they trained out the 
Duke and his men, in which skirmish the Duke hardly es- 
caped, losinge fifty or sixty gentylmen, whom he afterwards 
redeemed by ransom. 

The Duke of Medena'^Celi lost his eldest son for pry 
sooner to the Turque, and being carried to Constantinople, 
it is supposed that his ransom must be the surrender of a 
hold in Africa, the Duke's patrimony. 

Your Lordship has formerly harde that the Sophi *[ 
had favorablie receved Baissett,J the Turques sonne, though 
in disgrace with the father for th' affection the Jenesaries 
had to hym. Sythens the same Bassett, mystrustinge some 
practyce of his father, paste by confederesy betwixte the Sophi 
and a secretorye attendinge on the same Bassett, cauled the 
secretory to hym, and refusing to utter his conferensye, strake 
of his hed in his pry vat lodginge and the terry torie of 
another state ; which displesantly taken, provoked the prac- 
tise, as semeth, for his delyvery, so farre fourth as the Sophi 
hathe nowe offred to sende him to the father agayne as 
prysoner. The manner of theire imprisonment is in a cage. 

The nowe Bishoppe of Rome || hath emprysoned upp dyvers 
Collonnas, the cardinalls, kynsmen to the late bishoppe, 

* After the Spanish fleet under the Duke of Medina Celi had been 
defeated, the Turks laid siege to the fort Gerba, which was held by 
Don Alvaro de Sande. When no succour arrived, Alvaro and his 
garrison in despair attempted to force their way through the enemy, 
but were nearly all slain. Alvaro was sent prisoner to Constantinople, 
but was liberated by a treaty of peace. 

t The King of Persia. 

+ Bajazet. 

$ Solyman, to whom historians give the title of ' the magnificent.' 
I! Pope Pius IV. (Angelo de Medecis). It was the custom among 
the English Protestants at this time to call the Pope the bishop of 
Rome. 



42 PEACE IN SCOTLAND. [JULY, 

and others his favorites for their okle synnes and outragious 
dealings in tyme of abuse of there greetnes and authoritie. 

I have been a trewaunde a good tyme, moche absent 
from courte, at least for attendannce daylie, and so hope 
uppon collour of this progresseto get me downe into Suffolk. 
Thus I take my leve of your Lordshippe, prayinge God to 
sende the same al things prosperouse. From Grenewiche, the 
25th of July, 1560. 

Even nowe came hether one of th'admeraltie, which at- 
tended the fleet dispersed from Lythe, amongest others con- 
ductors of the Frenche, who saieth they are four thousande 
in number, able soldyours.* 

Your Lordshipp's humbly to command, < 

W. HONNYNG. 



LORD CLINTON TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My good Lord, I do moste hartely thank you for the 
fayer goshawk which your Lordship sent me by your 
botlar. I wold I had some mete present to send your Lord- 
ship that myght do you pleasure in your parts. I wyll 
send your Lordship a copyll of spanyells, for your botlar tells 
me your Lordship wold have some sent you by your frends 
here. 

The newes here are no other then such as your Lordship 
had lately from me, saving that all things is discharged in 
Scotland, and my Lord of Norfolk's grace is sent for by the 
Queue's Majestic to come to the courte, where he isloked for 
to be within six dayes. The French that were the commis- 
sioners in Scotland ar retourned into France, and have ben 
at the courte in ther way ; that is to say, Monsieur de Zau- 
dant, Monsieur la Brosse, the Byshop of Amyans, and the 

* There is another sentence in the original, written by Honning's 
own hand, but which it is impossible to understand. 



1560.] mi: FKKNCH LEAVE SCOTLAND. 43 

By shop of Valans. Ther went by see, Monsieur Martigcns 
and Monsieur d'Oysell, who were landyd at Galleys by ships 
of this realme by the Queue's Majestie's appoyntment, but at 
their own chardges, and thre thousand fy ve hundred soldyeres 
in ther company. At their landing they made the English 
captens and other gret chere, and gave chaynes to som and to 
som cowpps of sylver and gilt, with gret show of good-wyll. 
Bot I trust them never the better, for whensoever they may 
fynd advantage, they wyll not lose it, and therefore the Quene's 
Majestic wyll so provyde as theyr presences shal be well 
inough prevented. 

I am advertised that live French ships of Dyepe and New- 
havyn, ladyn with wyne and sak and other swete wynes, are 
gon to make sale therof hi Irland, which wynes were the 
provisions for the see made for the French kyng's ships ; and 
now upon this peace, they sell them. If ther meyning in Ire- 
land be bot to sell their wynes without other devys or practys, 
then is no matter of ther going, as I take. If ther be other 
meynyng, 1 am sure your Lordship wyll understand it well. 

As I shall here anything out of France, I will advertise your 
Lordship. Thus with my most harty commendations to 
your Lordship and my good Lady of Sussex, I beseech God 
send you both long lyff in moche honor. From the courte at 
Farnham, the 8th of August, 1560. 

Your Lordship's assured to command, 

E. CLYNTON. 



W. HONNING TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

After humble and due remembraunce to your good Lord- 
shipp, the same maye please t'understand that my long 
silence hath preceded through absence in the countrey, where- 
of I signified your Lordship by my last letters. Th'hole of 

* Count Martiques, " of the house of Luxembourg," commander of 
a party of French soldiers who came to Scotland in Jan. 1559-60. 



[OCT. 



44 HEYDON AND WOODHAM WALTERS. [OCT. 

my truandise I enjoyed not in countreye, for that I was awhile 
occupied about patching of a howse in London, which I late 
procured for a good terme of 0011 Mr. Smith and his wief, 
persons of sixty yeres of age the pece: these their grete yeres 
emboldened me to promesse unto them by their incessant 
provocations yerelie a buck and doe for their lives only, not 
daring to t'adventure th'hole terme of the lease. 

My happ this yere hath been ill in ipso limine impigere, 
moche to my descredit and breche of covenant, for where I had 
made request to your Lordshippe' s keper at Lexdon * present 
myselfe to satisfye that turn, and had formerlye twise wryt- 
ten to Woodham Water, f where I founde aunswer at a second 
sending insufficiencye for the bareness of the game. I was 
also utterlie denied at Lexdon aforesaid uppon pretence of 
bareness of that ground, (the contrarye whereof myn own eyes 
gave testimonye,) insomuch as perplexed for the latenes of the 
yere, I was driven to returne the flat waye to my wief to Lon- 
don, who ther uppon wished your Lordshippe in England, 
with hope that rather then bothe our creditts shuld have been 
stayned, th'age of the persons considered, we shuld not have 
despayred to have atteyned certentie of warrant for them. 

I went so near the winde with the keper, that I told hym 
your Lordshippe knewe I wold in reason respecte the game 
as fully as he, and prayed to have a barren doe to be 
then killed by good woodmanshipp, (which he semeth to 
lacke,) t'excuse my promesse. And that also was flatly made 
impossible. Thus to please my wieffs fantasies, I trouble 
your Lordshippe with myself and her causes. 

Nowe to matier of more accompte. It maye like your 
Lordshipp, that I founde this bearer in corte uppon my 

* Lexden, in Essex. 

f Woodham Walters, in Essex, formerly a possession of the Fitz- 
Walter family. It came into the family of the Earl of Sussex by mar- 
riage in the fifteenth century, and was the family seat at this time. " In 
his time the ancient family seat in this parish began to be neglected ; 
for, having obtained a grant of New Hall in Boreham, he made it the 
place of his residence." (Momnt.} The earl built the present church 
of Woodham Walters in 1563 and 



1500.] REFORMATION OF THE CURRENCY. 45 

soden arrival! . By hym 1 ment to scrible a few lines. 1 
have remembered hym to bring the proclamation and de- 
vyses touching the decree of our base moneys, which is nowe 
our greatest occupation, to satisffie the people with know- 
ledge of the difference of the coynes.* Th'erle of Salopp f 
is lately ded. Happy for the new Earle that the father 
toke not that Lady to wiefwho (yf your Lordshipp remember) 
you did in the closett of Westminster decerne to like well to 
here herself speake. His office of chamberlayn of the ex- 
chequier I think will be bestowed on Mr. Secretory. Hi- 
therto not knowen who shal be President and Justice of the 
foure shiers beyond Trent. This sayd berer seeth the 
corte stuffed with morners, yea, many of the better sorte 

* During the preceding reigns the coinage had been extremely de- 
based. One of Elizabeth's most popular acts, at this time, was the re- 
formation of the money. " To Queene Elizabeth," saithCamden, " it 
is to be ascribed, that there hath beene better and purer money in Eng- 
land, than was seene in two hundred yeeres before, as hath beene else- 
where in use thorought all Europe." See Camden ; and also a curious 
letter on the subject in Lodge, i. 345 Simon, in his Essay on Irish 
Coins, has preserved the following fragment of a popular ballad made 
in consequence : 

" Let bone-fires shine in every place, 
Sing and ring the bells a-pace, 
And pray that long may live her grace, 

To be the good queene of Ireland. 

*' The gold and silver which was so base, 
That no man could endure it scarce, 
Is now new coyn'd with her own face, 

And made go current in Ireland." 

t Francis Talbot, fifth Earl of Shrewsbury, lie had two wives. 
Very soon after the death of the second, he made an overture of mar- 
riage to the Lady Pope, widow of the founder of Trinity College, Ox- 
ford, " but the etiquette of courtship in those days required more time 
than could be spared by two lovers whose united years made somewhat 
more than a century, and the good old earl was arrested by death when 
perhaps he had not made half his advances." Lodge. 



46 DEATH OF AMY ROBSART. [OCT. 

in degree, for the Lord Robert's wieff, * who was, upon the 
imschancing death,buried in the hed churcheof th'university of 

* This was Amy Robsart, the daughter of Sir John Robsart of De- 
vonshire, according to Dugdale, and celebrated as the heroine of Ke- 
nihvorth. Whether the story of her murder be true or not, it is now 
impossible to determine, though it cannot be denied that appearances 
are much against the innocence of her husband, Lord Dudley. In some 
letters written at the time of her death, which have already been 
printed, there are allusions to the suspicion which then prevailed, and 
some short time afterwards we find Cecil speaking of him as still " de- 
famed by his wife's death." We find the charge of murder first pub- 
licly urged against Leicester in the celebrated libel called " Leicester's 
Commonwealth," printed in 1584. " First," says the author of that 
tract, " his lordship hath a speciall fortune, that when he desirethanie 
woman's favour, then what person soever standeth in his way, hath the 
luck to die quicklie for the finishing of his desire. As for example : 
when his lordship was in full hope to marrie her majestie, and his own 
wyfe stoode in his light, as he supposed : he did but send her asid, to 
the house of his servaunt Forster of Cumner by Oxforde, where shortlie 
after she had the chaunce to fal from a paire of staires, and so to breke 
her neck, but yet w.ythout hurting of her hoode that stoode upon 
her heade. But Sir Richarde Varney, who by commaundement re- 
mayned wyth her that daye alone, wyth one man onlie, and had sent 
away perforce al her servauntes from her, to a market two myles of, 
he (I saye) wyth his man can tel how she died, which man being taken 
afterward for a fellonie in the marches of Wales, and offering to pub- 
lish the maner of the said murder, was made away privilie in prison. 
And Sir Rychard himself dying about the same tyme in London, cried 
piteouslie, and blasphemed God, and said to a gentleman of worship of 
myne acquaintance not long before his death, that al the divels in hell 
did teare him inpeeces. The wife also of Bald Buttler, kinsman to 
my L., gave out the whole facte a litle before her death." 

Ashmole, in the account of Cunmor given in his Berkshire, makes 
some additions to the foregoing account, which he gathered from 
the tradition of the neighbourhood. He says that " the inhabitants 
will tell you there that she was conveyed from her usual chamber 
where she lay, to another where the bed's head of the chamber stood 
close to a privy postern door, where they in the night came and 
stifled her in her bed, bruised her head very much, broke her 
neck, and at length flung her down stairs, thereby believing the 
world would have thought it a mischance, and so have blinded their 



1500.] KING OF SWEDEN EXPECTED. 47 

Oxford. The cost of the funerall esteemed at better then 
two thousand poundes. 

The fort and territory about Jerby, I understand, is 
evicted from the possession of King Phillipp by the Turke. 

William Drury* is absolutely delivered, and shortly to mary 
with the Lady Williams f of Tame. Th'other brother for 
one degree hathe libertie of fleete and accesse of his freiids. 

A grete man in Spayn, J incerto nomine hitherto to my 
knowledge, is said to be in prison by the vehemencye of 
th'inquisitioii, and Don Anthonio de Toledo sent to Fraunce 
to dissuade a nationall counsayll there ment for matier of re- 
ligion. 

Thus for the present I shall ende, beseeching your Lordship 
to receyve in good parte my poore scribling. From Hamp- 
ton Courte, Cth Octobris, 1560. 

Your Lordship's humbly to command, 

W. HONNYNG. 

We have no certentie of th'arryval of the King of Swe- 
den, yet doth his ambassador persuade his former arereynes. 

villany." He then tells us that she was first buried privately, but 
at the desire of her father disinterred, and an inquest held over her, 
and then that her body was buried magnificently in St. Mary's 
church at Oxford. This story of her first interment seems discounte- 
nanced by the present letter. 

* Sir William Drury was of a good family settled at Hawstead 
in Suffolk. In 1575 he was lord president of Munster, and he died in 
1598, lord deputy of Ireland. 

f Margery, daughter of Thomas, Lord Wentworth, second wife of 
John, Lord Williams of Thame. He died in 1559. 

t The Archbishop of Toledo ? 



48 ANACHRONISMS IN KENILWOKTH. [OCT. 



AMY DUDLEY TO MR. FLOWERDEN, ESQ. THE ELDER.* 

Mr. Flo warden, I understand by Gryse that you put hym 
in remembrance of that you spake to me of concernyng the 
goyng of sertayne shepe at Syscome, and althowe I forgot 
to mouve my Lorde therof before his departing, he being 
sore trubeled with wayty affares, and I not beyng alltoge- 

* This letter, in the handwriting of the unfortunate Amy Robsart, 
mentioned in the last, is preserved along with another by her husband 
also addressed to Mr. Flotverden, (perhaps Flowerdeu,) in a volume of 
letters collected by Le Neve, in the Harleian MSS It is without date, 
and is only inserted here on account of its connexion with her name. 
Lodge, following Dugdale, has incorrectly called this lady Anne, an error 
which no doubt originated from misreading a MS., where it was written 
Amie. The Amy Robsart here, busy about the affairs of her husband's 
household, is another character from the Amy Robsart of Sir Walter 
Scott. Indeed, the concealed marriage of Leicester with Amy Robsart 
is but a romantic fiction. This marriage took place in 1550, and was 
celebrated at the palace of Sheen with great splendor. 

Kenilworth, however, is not one of the most excellent of Scott's 
romances, if we look upon it in an historical light. It owes to history 
only the names of its heroes, and in some measure their characters. 
Amy Robsart died in 1560, when Sir Walter Raleigh, one of the per- 
sonages of the romance, born about 1552, was only eight years old, 
and about which time Dudley, not yet Earl of Leicester, aspired to 
the hand of the queen. The plot of the romance is laid in the year 
of the grand visit to Kenilworth, in 1575, after he had given up all 
prospects of marriage with the queen, and when he had another wife, 
whom the next year he repudiated in order to marry the widow of 
the unfortunate Earl of Essex. The great " variance" between the 
Earls of Sussex and Leicester, when they were reconciled in the 
Queen's presence, occurred in 1565. Wayland is introduced quot- 
ing a passage from Shakspeare's Tempest, which is believed not to 
have been written before 1612, or even 1613. The poet was not born 
till 1564, so that at the visit to Kenilworth he would be but eleven 
years old. Thus circumstances, and allusions to circumstances, which 
happened at different periods from 1560 to 1612, are reduced within 
the space of the year 1575. presenting a succession of anachronisms such 
as is scarcely allowable even in a romance. 



1560.] LETTER OF AMY UO11SART. 49 

ther in quyet for his soden departyng, yet notwithstanding, 
knowing your accustomed freyndshipe towardes my Lorde 
and me, I nether may nor can deney you that request in 
my Lorde's absence of myne owne awtoritye, yea andytwer 
a greater matter, as yf any good occasion may serve you, 
so tryc me; desyring you furder that you will make sale 
of the wolle so sone as is possible, although you sell it for sixe 
shillings the stone, or as you wolde sell for yourself ; for my 
Lorde so ernystly required me at his departyng to se thosse 
pore men satisfied as thowghe it had bene a matter de- 
pending upon lyfF; wherfore I force not to sustayne a lyttel 
losse therby, to satisfye my Lorde's desyr ; and so to send that 
mony to Grysse's howse to London, by Brydwell, to whom my 
Lorde hathe geven order for the payment therof. And thus 
I ende allwaye trobelyng you, wyshyng that occasyon serve 
me to requite you ; untyll that tyme I most pay you with 
thankes. And so to God I leve you, from in Heydes, * this 

7 of Auguste. 

Your assured duringe lyff, 

AMYE DUDLEY. 



SIR NICHOLAS THROGMORTON f TO SIR THOMAS CHAMBER- 
LAYN. 

My Lord Ambassadeur, the 29th of October last, I 
wrote to you from Paris by the waye of Monsieur de Chan- 
tonet, the King Catholic's ambassadeur here in this court, 
and therwith sent you a packet from the Quene's Majestic 
and other particular letters, as from my L. Robert Dudley, my 

* Lord Dudley dates his letter to Mr. Flowerderi " from Hays." 

t In the original there is no signature to this letter, but it seems 
evidently written by Throgmorton, the ambassador in France. 

t Sir Thomas Chamberlayn was sent as ambassador Ledger to the 
court of Philip II., after that king's return to Spain. He was the son of 
William Chamberlayn, of Prestbury, in Gloucestershire, and had been 
employed in various foreign negotiations by Hen. VIII. and Ed. VI. 
He died in 1580. 

VOL. I. E 



50 FRANCE AND SCOTLAND. [NOV. 

Lady Marques of Northampton, my Lady Clynton, and Mr. 
Secretary, with certen buttons and gloves, mentioned in the 
said letter. All which I trust are come to your hands. 

And wher you complaine of your slowe hearing out of Eng- 
land ; I mervail not moche, though you (being so farr of) be 
kept fasting, wher I that am within a kenning cannot hear from 
thense sometime (and most often) in a monethe or six weeks. 
It is the pleasure that men have that walke our fortune, but 
in the meantyme smaller service to our mestres often tymes 
ensueth thereof. 

As to some of your letters, miscarried as you thinke : suche 
of yours as have from tyme to tyme come to my handes, I 
have caused to be as safely delivered as myne own. As I do 
allways advertise you by my letters of the receipt of any from 
you, and their sending into England, and lykewise name par- 
ticularly as many as I receyve from home to be sent to you. 
And because you may know that I do so : I do always use 
to make recitall in my next ensueing letters of the same 
agayne and of the messengers, to th' intent that you may 
well perceyve whether they miscarry or not, and at whose 
hands to demand them. Whiche way yf you would com- 
mande your secretary to use for you, then shuld I knowe 
whether all suche letters as you wryte, and send to me, come 
to my handes or no, and the want thereof, and so of suche 
other, as you send by any other waye. 

And whereas by my said letters I wrote unto you of the 
coming hither of the Lord of St. Johne of Jerusalem, of Scot- 
land, sent from the nobilitie and people of Scotland, to performe 
such things in the name of them all as were articulated and 
accorded upon in their late treaty,* made betwene the com- 
missioners of this side and them : and also thereupon to de- 
mand of this King and Quene the ratification of the said 
agrement : according to his commission and instructions : 



* The treaty of Edinburgh, by which the French soldiers were to 
be withdrawn from Scotland. 



1560.] REFUSAL TO RATIFY THE TREATY. 51 

the copyes whereof I send you herewith that you may well 
understand the same, and precede the more soundly therin, 
whensoever you shall have occasion moved you. The said 
Lord of St. John's hathe bene with the said Princes, w r ith 
whom he hathe preceded according to his directions, and hathe 
demanded the ratification. At his first cominge he was moche 
made of, and many thinges promised him ; but after a fewe 
days not so moche. To the demande of the Frenche King and 
Queue's ratification of the treaty, answer was made him, that 
for as moche as the Scottes had in no parte performed that 
that belonged to good subjects, but had assembled themselves 
upon their owne authoritie, without consent of the King and 
Quene their soveraignes : the same treaty ought not to be re- 
garded, and therefore they wold not ratifye it. The further 
reasons why, they wold not tell hym, but concluded that the 
King and Quene wold send two gentlemen into Scotland, to 
declare their griefs and raisons why they thought not mete 
to ratifye the said accord. And so he standeth upon his 
depeche awaye from hence homeward with this answer. 
Among other things these Princes here are not a little griefed 
that suche a solempn legation is sent into England, and that 
there is but one sent hither, and he in post ! There are come 
into England from th' estates of Scotland, the Erles of Mor- 
ton* and Glencarn, and the Lord of Ledington, to visit her 
Majestic, and to geve her thanks ; whiche is the legation 
that is above spoken of. Another reason that they find 
why they are not bound to ratifye the said Scottishe treaty 
is, that the same was made with suche and of suche as were 
rebells, and bare armes agenst their soveraigns, and therefore 
not to be observed; and that his commission and instruc- 
tions were subscribed by the same rebels, and of fewe of 
their good subjects. And yet the fewe names of suche 
fewe good subjects as were set to, were not of their owne 
hands, but counterfaited by other. Among other, these 

* James Douglas, fourth Earl of Morton, one of the most famous 
names in the history of these turbulent times. 

E2 



5'2 REFUSAL TO RATIFY THE TREATY. [NOV. 

ftyvolouse devices were founde out to refuse them their 
ratification. 

About the tyme of this said Ambassador's negotiation about 
these matters, I receyved letters from the Quene's Majestic, 
with commandement to demande eftsones of this King and 
Quene their ratification of the late treaty made allso in Scot- 
lande, betwene her Majestic and the French Commissioners, 
whiche had beene before delayed, for that the Scotts (these 
men said) had then yet sent nobody to performe things on 
their behalfes. The Scottishe Ambassadeur therefore having 
bene at the court, and done his legation, upon whose coming 
was all our staye, and therefore I hoping to have no further 
delaye therein, I resorted to the King and performed myne 
instructions and commandement, in renewing the demande of 
the said ratification of our treaty. Answer was made me 
bothe by the Kinge and Queue, the Cardinal of Lorreyne, and 
Duke of Guyse, in the same sort as had bene made before to 
the Lord of St. John's. Adding therto, that forasmoche as 
our treaty depended upon the Scotts' treaty, and because the 
Scotts had not performed all things on their parte : lyke as 
the King was not bound nor ought to ratine a treaty made 
by his subjects without the consente of their soveraigne, spe- 
cially their not observing their duties of obedience towards 
hym promised therein : so w r as there no cause the King 
should ratine ours, tyll the Scotts had performed all thinges 
on their behalfe. And so they have plainly refused to ratine our 
said treaty, and spared not to utter, in good tearmes, that the 
Scotts must be taught to know their duties, and to assemble 
in their soveraignes' names, and not in their owne, as thoughe 
they wolde make it a republic. And that rather then the 
King will suffer these disorders, he will quitte all. They 
stick nowe moche upon a league that is betwene the Queue's 
Majestic and the realm e of Scotland. And till that be broken, 
(which I trust is not meant to be,) I perceive they will be at 
no better point with us. 

As for the leaving the bearing of the Quene's Majesty's 



1560.] USURPATION OF THE ARMS OF ENGLAND. 53 

araies, whiche they use yet still in open shewes and entries of 
townes, whereof was spoken at this audience, and told that 
by the said treaty the King shuld leave so to do : that was 
answered that till a treaty be ratifyed it is no treaty : and 
therefore ther is no reason why the King and Quene shuld 
sooner satisfie then be satisfied. And that the Kinge hathe 
borne the armes of longe tyme, and not without reason and 
title to do so. And that therefore ther is no cause why he 
shuld leave his right. These, with dy vers lyke purposes sound- 
ing all to be deffences and cavellations not to ratine our treaty, 
were used to me at this last negotiation. Wherein I could 
not alter their moodes for any allegations nor objections that 
I could use, but rather understand their entents of revenge, 
then wyll to quietnes. It is strange to see howe litle 
princes of honour passe for their promesses and authentick 
obligations. In the Frenche Kinge and Queue's commission 
given to Messieurs de Valence and Randan,* they promised 
bona fide et verbo reyio to performe and ratifie all that his 
deputies shuld agree upon : as you may se by the same : 
the coppie whereof I also send you herewith. 

These Scottes that the Frenche King and Quene make 
exceptions unto, are the very same that th'accorde and agre- 
ment were made with nowe at Edinbourgh. 

These doings, my Lord Ambassadeur, are farre from the 
terines that we were in, when our men were before Lyth, and 
our navy strong on the sea. There can be no evidenter de- 
claration of meanings and these men's intents (when tyme 
and meanes will serve) to put us in remembrance of things 
past, unlesse they shuld have bidd me to have retired myselfe 
hence indeede. 

The Frenche King, as I heere, hathe advertised the King 
of Spayne how he ment to precede with the Scotts in these 
his answers ; and the matter verie moche engreved of late 
by the Bishop of Lymoges the French Ambassadeur ther. 

* Charles de la Roehfoucault, Sieur de Randan, one of the Commis 
sioners sent into Sotland. 



54 FRENCH DESIGNS ON SCOTLAND. [NOV. 

And among other things the said Ambassadeur hathe re- 
quired the King Catholick's advise howe to procede with 
the saide Scotts, to make them come to their dueties and obe- 
dience. I heere that the King Catholick hathe therapon 
desyred to knowe of the Frenche whether they mynde to 
procede against them by way of force or otherwise : and 
knowing that, he will say his opinion. And he sayd further, 
that he thought it not mete the Frenche shuld so go to the 
matter by forces, as therby they might geve occasion of 
suspicion of other evel intents to their neighbours. These 
solicitations of the Frenche Ambassadeur with the King Ca- 
tholick, as I heere, have bene earnest at one side ; and the 
Spanishe Ambassador here laboureth as fast to knowe these 
men's determinations how they minde to procede with Scot- 
lande on th'other side, who, as I here, hathe bene partly 
answered here, that this King mindethe not to procede upon 
the Scotts by force, yf by any other meanes they maye wynne 
them to their duties and obedience to their Soveraignes. 

And for that the Frenche may perhappes insence the King 
Catholick of the matter and procedinge of Scotland, to their 
advantage, and otherwise then the truethe bearethe, and 
for that you may knowe the very truethe of the procedings 
with them and with us indeed, I thought very necessarye 
for your knowledge and the Queue's Majesty's service and 
for the truethe's sake to wryte to you thus muche, and to 
send you presently a true coppy of the treaty late made be- 
tweene the realme of Scotland and the Frenche, for I 
take it that you had it not truely before. And also a 
Jtrue coppy of the said Lord of St. John's commission and 
instructions. And to let you knowe also howe the said Lord 
of St. John's hathe preceded for his ratification, and what 
answer he had ; and also of my long delaye ever sins the 
first of September for the ratification of ours, being allwaies 
promised thafrit shuld be performed ; and nowe have recey ved 
this cassade at their handes. But these that they send into 
Scotland to answer the Scotts to their matters, shall also 



1560.] FRENCH DESIGNS ON SCOTLAND. 55 

go to the Quene's Majestie and declare unto her their fur- 
ther reasons of these their refusalls. 

The Quene's Majestie signified lately unto me, that her 
pleasure was you shuld have knowledge hereof, whiche I 
thought good to send youe iiowe from hence, by her High- 
nes's commandement, rather then you shuld tary for the 
same out of England; and the rather also for that the 
Frenche labour the matter apace with the Kinge of Spayne, 
as I heere. You may take knowledge of all these proceed- 
ings as come from the Quene's Majestie, and so geve the 
same truely t'understand to the said King Catholic at good 
length, with all the circumstances to be, by his wise and 
grave judgment and good amitye, betwixt the Quene's Ma- 
jestie and him, uprightly considered : and the Frenche's dis- 
semblinge and notorious promesse-breakinge so manifestly 
seene, together with their intents to have to do with the Scotts 
for revenge, whatsoever is given him t' understand to the con- 
trary : wherin our parte is lyke to be, for that they have so 
openly declared themselves, bothe byrefusall to geve the rati- 
fication, and by so boldlye maynteining and deffending their 
usurpation of th'armes of England, and saye they have right 
and title therunto. 

The men that were named unto me shuld be sent out 
of hand first to the Quene's Majestie to satisfie her, and 
afterwarde to the nobilitie and people of Scotland, are 
Messieurs de Noailles, that was last Ambassadeur in Eng- 
land, and Le Croc the King's pane tier. And because you 
shall se with what hast they minde to sende them, Monsieur 
de Noailles is gone hence to Bordeaux to put his things in 
order there, and so to come back agayne to the courte, and 
then on his journey. This is a good meaning and dealing of 
Princes that pretend to great amytie, and yet their wordes 
muste be beleavid. 

If the Scottes have not done their duties (as it is but cavil- 
ling to denye it) what hathe the Quene's Majestie to do with- 
all. She hathe made a treaty with the commissioners of the 



f)() FRANCE AND SPAIN. [NOV. 

Frenche King and Queue, being authorised therunto : arid in 
the same the Frenche King is bound by expresse articles to 
ratine it within sixty dayes without any exception or promesse 
to let it. 

The Frenche Kinge hath alwayes acknowledged it and 
promised to ratyfye it. In th' ende he hathe not nor will not 
do it. And so hathe rejected the Scotts too. He threateneth 
to punishe the Scotts. And therefore seing he putteth us 
thus together, we must nedes loke to be measured at their 
handes with lyke measure, yf they can fynd how to do it. 

To conclude with you, I have advertised the Quene's Ma- 
jestie by my letters of the 17th of this moneth by Mr. Jones, 
whom I have depeched to her Majestic, of all these proced- 
ings. Howe the matter wil be taken, I knowe not, but, as 
I judge, not the best. As I shall heare from thence thereof, 
you shal be advertised. In the meantyme I trust you will so 
handle the matter as the Frenche do not carrye away the 
Kyng of Spayne, with their devises and persuasions of un- 
true thes in these matters, whiche I leave to your good and 
assured judgment and order, whereof and of your doings I 
praye you let me heare, as you maye. 

The 19th of this present I receyved another letter from 
you of the thirde of the same, brought by Caubon, but 
not delyvered me by him, for he was gone through towards 
Flaunders, and sent it back agayne to the Spanishe Ambas- 
sadeur to be delyvered unto me, as th'excuse was made. I pray 
you thank Monsieur o!e Champenon for his sure addresse of 
your letters to my handes by his brother Monsieur de Chan- 
tonet trTambassadeur's meanes. 

As for the molesting of your cooke, notwithstandinge the 
gentle answer of that King, I marvell not a litle thereat.* 

* The King of Spain, at the instigation, as is said, of the Conde de 
Feria, had caused the English ambassador's cook to be seized upon 
by the officers of the Inquisition as charged with heresy. In the 
Cotton MS. Vespas. C. vii, fol. 133, is preserved the original letter of 



1560.] FRANCE AND SPAIN. 57 

And though I be here in a place as evell lokyd upon as anye 
occupying this place of good tyme hath ben, yet T am not 
trobled for these matters. I thynke it be rather to feare you, 
then for anye meaninge to infringe th'ancient privileges of 
Ambassadeurs in those cases, or els I trust lyke measure wyl 
be measured to those whiche occupie lyke charge in 
England. 

This gentleman bearer hereof, a Portugall of nation, ser- 
vant to the Quene catholick, preferred to her in a place of 
a gentleman servant by Ruy Gomez, I do recommend unto 
you. I have known hym a good while ; he was Secretary 
to this Ambassadeur of Portugall. You wyll lyke him well. 
Yf you can be well acquainted with him, you will take 
pleasure in him, and be otherwise glad of his company who 
may also stande you in steade. 

I praye you let him knowe of my recommending him to 
you. And in case you se suche doubtfull tearmes betwixt 
the King of Spayne and us, whereby you may doubt the 
safe going of your letters into England or to me, this gen- 
tleman can helpe you in such nede to convey them safely 
unto my hands. Though he be the Quene of Spayne's ser- 
vant, yet he beareth that affection towardes the Spanyards 
that all Portugueses do. 

You are very scarce in your letters of your advertisements 
and occurrents of that court. I praye you amende your 
hand therm from henceforthe. 

This King thought to have removed hence for a fortnight, 
but the daye before his intended journey, he felt himselfe 
somewhat evill disposed of his body, with a payne in his 
head and one of his eares, whiche hathe stayed his removing 
from hence. 

And thus, &c. from Orleans, the 21st of November, 1560. 

Chamberlayn to the Queen, relating his proceedings in this affair, and 
the firm and manly remonstrances which he had made against this 
breach of 'his privileges as ambassador ol'a foreign power. 



58 MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS. [DEC. 



SIR NICHOLAS THROGMORTON* TO LORD ROBERT DUDLEY. 

It may lyke your good Lordshippe, lately I receavyd from 
Sir Thomas Chamberlayne, her Majestie's ambassadeur in 
Spayne, a packet of letters, wherin I think ther be some of 
your Lordshippe's, answering those of yours which I sent him 
before, together with two litle malletts, conteying such things, 
I suppose, as her Majestic and you sent for. He required me 
to addresse his packet of letters and portmanteaus to my 
lady his wife, who shuld take order with one and other, ac- 
cording to his direction. 

Sence the deathe of the late King,f things proceade here 
in suche sorte, as those that were worst affected to the Queue's 
Majestic, and most desirous to trouble her realme, shall not 
have so good and ready meanes to excuse their malice, as 
they had in the late King's tyme. 

And yet, my Lord, this I trust shalbe no occasion to make 
her Majestic lesse considerate, or her counsell lesse provident, 
for assuredlie the Quene of Scotland, her Majestie's cosen, 
dothe carrye herselfe so honorably, advisedlie, and discretelye, 
as I cannot but feare her progresse. Me-thinketh it were to 
be wished of all wyse men and her Majestie's good subiects, 
that the one of these two Quenes of the ile of Brittaine were 
transformed into the shape of a man, to make so happie a 
marriage, as therbie ther might be an unitie of the hole ile 
and their appendances. Whosoever is conversant in storyes, 
shall well perceave estats hath by no one thing growen so 
greate, and lastyd in their greatnes, as by mariages, which 
have united country es that do confyne together. 

* This letter is also without signature, but it is evidently written 
by the same person who wrote the preceding. 

t Francis II., the husband of Mary of Scotland, died on the fifth of 
December, 1560. 



1500.] ENVOY OF THE DUKE OF SAVOY. 59 

The profe thereof is notoriously scene by the house of 
Austeriche, in whose handes the one halfe of Europe, being 
Christenyd, is at this daye, whiche is come to passe by 
marriage only. Their first ancestor was not many yeres ago 
a meane counte of Habsbourge in Swiserland. And as they 
have come to this greatnes by this meanes, so dothe that race 
retayne still that principle to mayntayne their greatnes, and to 
increase it. And that I beleve your Lordship shall se well ve- 
rified by the bestowing of the prince of Spayne, and the 
emperor's children in marriage. 

My Lorde, lately here arrived from thence Monsieur de 
Morette, that was sent in legation from the Duke of Savoye 
to the Quene's Majestie, whiche in my simple opinion was 
evill forgotten, that he had no present. A newe discourtesie 
shewed to him and to his master by him, that was never used 
in my tyme to any prince or prince's minister. The honor 
that his master did to her Majestie did, in my simple opinion, 
deserve good acceptation; and the gentleman's negotiation 
and good affection to do her Majestie honour did deserve 
ordynarie courtoisie. Since his retorne to this courte, he 
hathe made so good reports of her Majestie, of her councell, 
and all her ministers, as he deserveth not to be forgotten, nor 
to be unkindly handled. And therefore yf it wold please 
youre Lordshippe so to remember her Majestie's honor as to be 
a meane that the gentleman, whiche shall come hether to 
condole, might bringe the said Monsieur de Morrette a 
chayne of four or five hundred crownes from her Majestie, yt 
should well repaire all that is past, and your Lordshippe 
shuld wynne to yourselfe moche honour. 

Thus I take my leave of your good Lordship from Orleauns, 
the last day of December, 1560.* 

* On the death of Francis II., France lost one excuse for meddling 
directly in the affairs of Scotland, but that country did not change 
the inclination of meddling, and since the great cause of jealousy be- 
tween France and Spain was taken away, the marriage between 



60 IRELAND. SHANE o'NEIL. [FEB. 



SIR GEORGE STANLEY* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX.f 

Right honorable? my dutye premysed, your Lordship shall 
understande, that at the makinge hereof my good lady my Lady 
Justice, with all the reste of your frendes in these quarters, 
were in good healthe, thankes be unto God.J I am bolde to 
trouble your Lordship with these my letters, not for any greate 
matter that I have to certefye you, but in acknowledging my 
dutye and assured good will, which I wold be lothe to be con- 
ceived oblyvious of, as also being required by Mr. Wakeleye to 
write unto your Lordship in his behalfe concerninge his suytes 
which I knowe I have no neede to do, but to satisfie his re- 
queste. As for newes, there is none, but all the sea quarters be 
in reste and peace, save onlye that I receavede this pre- 
sent daye a letter from O'Reeli, wherein he wrytt unto me 
that Shane O'Neele was readye to enter into his coun- 

Francis and Mary, Elizabeth lost the advantages given her by the 
Spanish intrigues. Mary soon after resolved to return to Scot- 
land. But her ultimate designs, and those of her French friends, 
were made apparent by her refusing, contrary to all justice, to sign 
the treaty of pacification agreed to by her commissioners at Edin- 
burgh. 

* Sir George Stanley, of Crosthall, in Lancashire, a younger brother 
of the Earl of Derby, was Marshall of Ireland. 

t The Earl of Sussex had been deputy of Ireland in the reign of 
Queen Mary, and was continued by Elizabeth. Campion describes the 
Earl as " a spare man of body, but sound and healthfull, passing va- 
liant, a deep reacher, very zealous in friendship, quicke in resolution 
of extremities in the field, wonderfull patient, able to tyre ten sol- 
diours, learned and languaged, ever doing with his penne, of utterance 
sharpe and sententious, wary, busie, painefull, and speedie, meeter to 
rule than to be overruled." Sussex is called in the Irish annals Thomas 
Fitz-Walter. 

J The Earl of Sussex embarked for England at Howth on the 29th 
of January, 1560-1, and Sir William Fitzwilliams was sworn Lord 
Justice on the 2nd of February. 

Shane (or John) O'Neil, the son of Con O'Neil, who had been 
created by Henry VIII , Earl of Tir-Owen, or Tyrone, had usurped 



1561.] SHANE O'NEIL'S REBELLION. 61 

trye* with fourteen dayes victualles, and dcsiringc also in 
his letter ayde of me. As for my owne suytes and affayres 
there, my only hope, under God and the Quene's Majestic, 
hollie resteth in your Lordship, as knoweth the Lorde God ; 
who encrease you with muche honor, and good successe in all 
your affaires, with spedy and safe retorne to your owne con- 
tentations. 

From Tryme, the laste of Februarij, 1560. 

Your Lord duryng lyfe to command, 

GEORGE STANLEY. 




CECIL TO RANDOLPH. 

have not much to wryte in the matter now men- 

the property of his father and the sovereignty of his clan in opposi- 
tion to the will of his father, who had appointed for his successor his 
other son Mathew, who was illegitimate, being the son, as Shane as- 
serted, of a low woman, the wife of a smith at Dundalk. Shane had 
rebelled, and been reduced to obedience in Queen Mary's days. 

At the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, the turbulence of the Irish 
was increased by the attempt at introducing the reformed religion, and 
by the representation of the secret emissaries of Rome. Shane 
O'Neil took up arms, and in 1561, invaded the territory of his 
neighbour O'Reily, and compelled him to acknowledge his authority. 
Next he entered Tirconnel, seized and ravaged the lands of Callagh 
O'Donnel, threw O'Donnel himself into prison, and abused his wife, 
whom he retained till his death as his concubine. His brutality and 
excesses were without bounds. Sussex went against him, but, as it 
seems, not altogether successfully, until by the persuasions of the 
Earl of Kildare, his kinsman, O'Neil was induced to return to his 
obedience on very favourable terms to himself, and went to London to 
make his submission to the Queen in person. 

* The county of Cavan, " otherwise called Breny Oneyle, or 
O'Relie's country." In the Act of Parliament for the attainder of 
Shane O'Neile and the extinguishing of the name of O'Neile, &c. 
(llth Eliz.) it is stated that " hee" (Shane), " entred first into Oneyle's 
countrie, and took hostages of him to be his man and at his com- 
mandement." 



62 MARY PREPARES TO RETURN. [JUNE, 

tioned in the Quene's Majesty's letters. Ye see our opinion 
here is that it shall doe much hurt in Scotland if the Quene* 
should come thither before thyngs be better established. 
To stay her is no better waye than that she and her friends 
in France maye fynd lack of conformytie there to the end 
purposed by her, which is to subvert the course of religion, 
and to withdraw the goodwill of hers hytherward ; whether it 
be rightly judged of here or no I know not. I have uppoii 
theis newes of her coming wished to have had but one houres 
conference with my Lord of Ledyngton. As yet I heare 
not of d'Oyzell's coming, but -as the French Embassador 
sayeth he is purposed to be here about the 8th July. No- 
walleesf is past hence yesterdaye, somewhat disgraced, for 
the Queue's Majesty e wold not speke with him, for that 
he sought not to see Her Majestye at his passadg into Scot- 
land. Uppon the receipt of these letters, I pray you make 
me some answer, although it be but that ye cannot make 
any full answer. I send you such pamphletts as be here, 
and bid you well so fair, untill my better leasure. Methink- 
eth, seeing the Lords of Scotland be not together, that it was 
well doone for two or three of -the principall reteyning the 
Queue's Majestie's letter to send to all the rest some dispersed 
coppyes of the letter, for I have so disposed it, it shall doe no 
hurt to be made publick. And so I end. From Grenewich, 
the 30th of June, 1561. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



SIR WILLIAM CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your Lordship, sence your departure I never 
heard from you, but by one letter from Holyheade. I fynd 
by letters from my Lord Justice, sent from thence before your 

Mary, who was now preparing for her return to Scotland, 
t Nouailles. 



1501.] SHANE O'NEIL' s REBELLION. (>:3 

passage over,* how unfortunately O'Donnell and the Con 
tess of Argile f be taken by Shane. J I thynk surely there is 

* The Earl of Sussex went over to Ireland on the 24th May, 1561, 
where he remained until the 16th of January following. 

t It is not quite clear why this title is given to the wife of O'Donnel, 
for it must be of her that Cecil speaks. O'Carroll had a wing of 
the County of Cavan called Orgiel, which territory comprehended 
Oriole and Uriel. Was O'Donnel's wife of this family ? Argile and 
Orgiel are probably the same place. 

J According to the act for the attainder of Shane O'Neile, (llth of 
Elizabeth) before quoted, after Shane had made himself master of 
O'Reilly's Country, he " made a rood into Tirconele and there by 
treachery and falsehood took O'Donile a faithful subject to your Ma- 
jestic, his wife and his son and heir prisoners, and so cruelly handled 
the said O'Donil, that through duress of imprisonments hee was 
compelled to yield up into his hands his holds and castles, his plate 
and all his substance, and then putting him at liberty detained still 
the son in captivity, and the wife he kept in carnal knowledge. 
Thus having O'Donil's country and people at commandment, he 
began to fortify a strong island in Tyrone, which for the strength and 
force of the place hee caused to bee called in despite Fooghnegall, 
which is as much as to say The Hate of Englishmen." 

In the Annals of Innisfallen (MS. Translation in the library of Mr. 
Crofton Croker) the account of the taking of O'Donnell is thus related. 
" The Calvagh (i. e. Chafles or Cahir) O'Donell was taken prisoner by 
O'Neil, (John,) on the 14th of May. Caffry Mac Manus, whose resi- 
dence was upon Loch Beaghy, was at enmity with Calvagh. All the 
people of the country gathered about Conn the son of Calvagh, and 
stood watching for him by the barge on the border of the lane. Col 
vagh was then at Kill-otovrar, with very few men ; being attended by 
some women, and bards. Some of the people of Tirconnell betrayed 
him to O'Neil in the following manner. Calvagh having no guard 
to protect him, took shelter in a monastery. As soon as O'Neil heard 
this, he went privately with a picked band, and, surrounding the place 
where Calvagh and his wife were, made them both prisoners. She 
was the daughter of Me Clean. He then carried them to Tyrone, and 
kept O'Donell Calvagh in very close confinement, taking his wife to 
his own bed, by whom he had some children. It is very certain" 
adds the chronicler, " that it would have been a difficult matter to 
have taken Calvagh from the tribe of Conall, if he had not been be- 
trayed in the manner above related." 



64 SHANK O'NEIL'S REBELLION. [JUNE, 

some treachery therein. I beseche you have good regard 
therto, and, seing Shane thus useth the matter, I se severitie 
and terror must worke your victory. At this present, notwith- 
standing O'Donnell's takyng, I doo send unto you the robes 
and crownetts, which may be applied as your Lordship seeth 
cause.* You shall also at this tyme receave the Queue's 
Majesty's letters concerning the money. I am overruled in it 
with the opinion of the more, that this is the best waye, and 
therefore I pray your Lordship doo therein the best that you 
can, that some merchants there maye take into theire hands 
the transportation. And I will, uppon knowledg thereof, pro- 
cure that they may have commission to have ayde in the waye 
betwixt the sea-syde and London, and also spedy expedition 
here at the mynt. Here is presently no change of newes 
here. I have gyven order for the laying of the postsf accord- 
ing to your appoyntment, as this bearer shall she we your 
Lordship, and so I take my leave. 

* These robes and coronets were probably for distribution as rewards 
to the Irish chiefs who supported the English government. In 1541, 
O'Donnel requested the Lord Deputy (Sir Anthony St. Leger,) to ask 
the King of England to give him Parliament robes, which St. Leger 
recommended, adding that O'Donnel was furnished of other apparel 
better than any Irishman ; " for at suche tyme as he mette with me he 
was in a cote of crymoisin velvet with agglettes of gold twenty or 
thirty payer; over that a greate doble cloke of rich crymoisin saten, 
garded with black velvet ; a bonette with a fether sette full of agglettes 
of gold, that methought it strange to se him in so honorable an appa- 
raill, and all the rest of his nation, \_Sepf] that I have seen as yet, so 
vile." MS. in State Paper Office. 

In the Sidney Letters, ii. 218, may be found a recommendation to 
the Queen to bestow a garment upon the wife of (Tirlough Linnagh) 
O'Neil. 

t This is the first attempt at an establishment of a post between 
England and Ireland. Holinshed says, ee And because in these trouble 
some times, it were meet advertisements should go from her Majesty 
and council to the Lord Deputy, and so likewise from his Lordship to 
them, order was taken, for the more speedy conveyance of letters reci- 
proke, there should be set posts appointed between London and Ire- 
land." 



IRISH AFFAIRS. (jr, 

Your Lordship hath as I psrceyve well provided for Mr. 
Vice-Chamberlayn and me that we shall not be troubled with 
suytes for any fee dear, in that you have already distributed 
them. And so I leave to trouble your good Lordship, wish- 
ing to the same from the bottom of my heart all good success. 
19th June, 1561. 

Your Lordship's at command, 

W. CECIL. 

Here included I send to your Lordship the weight of the 
coronets and collers. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your good Lordship, my duty remembered, 
I was not so perplexed with lack of intelligence from your 
Lordship and that realm, at any time sense I served in this 
court. 

I had no letter from you sense one of the date of the 23 
of June. Here hath been sprede foul rumours, and I mys 
trusted so much some will in scattering of them, that I was 
not so much discomforted with them as otherwise of necessity 
I ought to be. It is said, that Knockfarguss* is taken by 
Shane. It is said that your Lordship hath had a great 
overthrow. Delvest to be slain. You retired. Ovaylye^ 
taken. Fynally all desperate ; and hanging thus in these 

* Carrickfergus. 

t By the subsequent letter, 30th Nov. 1562, from the Bailiffs of 
Dundalk to the Earl of Sussex, Mr. Delves' s band appear to have 
been stationed in that town. 

J Offaly, now the King's County, and so called as Leix was called 
the Queen's County by Act of Parliament, 3 and 4 Philip and Mary. 
The instructions given to the Earl of Sussex in 1560, contained direc- 
tion to build castles in Leix and Offaly, to reduce Shane O'Neal by 
force or otherwise, &c. Vide Cox i. 315.] 

O'Neil had in fact, by the subjection of the native chieftains, in- 
creased very much his own power, and it is worthy of observation 
that then, as at all other times, the troubles of Ireland have been quite 

F 



()6 MEASURES AGAINST PIRACY. [JULY, 

termes, I still differed from daye to daye to send any letters, 
hoping suerly to have heard from your Lordship, but seing 
yet no letter coming from you, I could not dryve off tyme, but 
have thought mete to beseche you that howsoever fortune 
falleth there, to lett me know it. 

My Lord of Kyldare* is verie ernest to returne, and her 
Majestic stayeth only to heare from you. 

It may be that as sone as this letter shal be on the waye, 
I shall receave some knowledg from your Lordship. 

I was yesterdaye at Woodham Waters,f a house suerly of 
goodly recept. We ar much troobled with grevouse com- 
plaints of pyracyes ; and I thynk surely not without cause. 
And to remedy the matter there be devised, as your Lordship 
shall see, by a proclamation, certen articles which I send 
to your Lordship herwith. Yf you gyve some lyke order in 
that realme, it shal be very well doon. I thynk it is very 
nedefull in that realme. 

Monser d'Oyzell came from the Scottish Quene, with re- 

as much the result of the private ambition of the agitators, and the 
dissensions of petty chieftains, as of opposition to the English govern- 
ment. The Innisfallen Annals observe on this year, " O'Neill ransack- 
ed and plundered Meath and Breagh, he subdued Tirconnell, having 
still Calvagh O'Donnell prisoner, a weak and infirm man. At this 
time there was no governor in Tirconnell, and so O'Neill took the 
power to himself, and had under him all the province of Ulster, from 
Drogheda to Earne ; so that he was, or might justly be called, a pro- 
vincial prince, at that time, the English alone being against him." 

* Gerald Fitz-Gerald, eleventh Earl of Kildare ; " on the 7th of 
May, 1560," says Cox, " the Queen sent him (the Earl of Sussex) 
orders to perswade the Earl of Kildare to go to England ; and that 
the Queen would lend him money in England on his bond ; [this was 
probably for the expenses of his journey, should such be made matter 
of excuse, as the Earl appears by Sir W. Cecil's letter of the 21st of 
August, 1561, to have an unpaid debt to the crown of 500;] and if 
the Earl refused, then the Lord Lieutenant was to show him the 
Queen's positive commands to that effect ; and if he still declined the 
voyage, then the Lord Lieutenant was to apprehend him." 

t See note on p. 44. 



1561.] MARY'S RETURN TO SCOTLAND. <>7 

quest that the Queen his mistress might have a salve con- 
duct to pass along our sea coast, and himself to pass into 
Scotland to provide for her coming. Many reasons moved 
us to mislike her passadg, but this only served us for answer, 
that where she had promised to send the Queue's Majestic a 
good answer for the ratification of the last leage of peace 
made in Edinburgh, and now had sent none, her Majestic 
wold not disguise with her, but plainly wold forbear to 
show her such pleasure until she should ratify it, and that 
done, she should not only have free passadg, but all helps 
and gratuities. Monser d'Oyzell was also gently required, 
to retume with this answer. 

What will follow we shall shortly see. This proceeding 
will like the Scots well. 

The Quene's Majestic is inhelth, and still far from mariadg, 
for aught that I can perceive. God send me speedy hearing 
from your Lordship, and that also somewhat comfortable. 

From New Hall,* the 25th of July, 1561. 

Your Lordshipp's at command, 

W. CECIL. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your good Lordship, your letter dated the last 
of July at Armagh, came to me the 8th of this month at 
Ippswich, with a letter to the Quene's Majestic. The reding 

* The seat of the Earl of Sussex, in Essex. See note on p. 44. 
Cecil was with the Queen on a progress into Essex and Suffolk, by way 
of Wanstead, Hovering, Pyrgo, New Hall, (where she was from the 
21st to the 25th of July,) Colchester, St. Osyth's, Harwich, Ipswich, 
and so back by Smalbridge, Gosfield, Standen, Hartford, and Enfield. 
It was in this excursion that the Queen took offence at the slovenly 
manner in which the Church service was performed, and showed a 
feeling of dislike to the marriage of the clergy, which gave rise to an 
order against all resort of women to the lodgings of Cathedrals and 
Colleges. See Nares' Burghley, ii. 240, 241 . 

F 2 



68 IRISH AFFAIRS. [AUG. 

of yours, I assure your Lordship, so apauled me, that I had 
much a-doo to behave myself in sort to kepe close the depe 
green of my hart ; my pryncipall greeff, for that my Lord of 
Penbrook being absent, I knew not one, no, my Lord, not one 
with whom to break my mynd,but ether it wold content them to 
here amiss of you, or of that matter. In the end, dely veryng to 
the Queene's Majesty your letter, I made of the matter a little 
byckeryng wherin, as it was true Shane, had the greatest loss. 

I also scattered the matter abrode to be a playne overthrow 
of Shane's power, with the hurt of two or three captayns. The 
next daye my Lord of Kyldare had letters from my Lady his 
wiffe,* but my former occupyeng of men's heades, retarded 
the creditt of the report of those letters. God send your 
Lordship some better fortune, and methinketh you ought not 
to pass over that cowardness t without notable punishment, 
which so evidently endangered the whole matter. The 
Quene's ^Majesty I perceyve smelleth the offence, and say th 
she thinketh you will not pass it over. I can not tell what 
your Lordship's former affection may doo, but I feare you 
shall have moo such parts, if ye pass over this with silence. 
I thynk by your next letters we shall see some determination 
of you therin, or else I wold be right sorry. 

The 10th of this, at Ippswich,| was a great mishapp dis- 

* Mabel, 2nd daughter of Sir Anthony Brown, K. G. 

t The action alluded to in this letter is probably the same as that 
described in the following extract from the MS. Annals of Innisfallen, 
" O'Neill sent some of the most faithful of his followers to keep O'Do- 
nell from the hand of the Lord Deputy, by removing him from one 
island to another in the wilds of Tyrone. The Lord Deputy immedi- 
ately sent out from hts camp at Armagh, a company of captains with 
a thousand horse and foot to plunder Orgiall. O'Neill, informed of this 
by his spies, instantly pursued the plunderers, whom he found in pos- 
session of their spoil. He attacked them furiously, and, though he met 
with an obstinate resistance, and many fell on both sides, the spoil at 
last was left with the people of Orgiall." 

+ The Court was at Ipswich, from the 6th to the 10th of August. 



1561.] LADY CATHERINE GREY. 69 

covered. The lady Catherine * is certainly known to be 
big with child, as she saith, by the Erie of Hertford, who is 
in France. She is committed to the Tower. He is sent for. 
She saith that she was married to him secretly before Christ 
mas last. 

Thus is God displeased with us. The Scottish Queen was 
the 10th of this* month at Bulloygn, and means to take ship 
ping at Callise. Nether those in Scotland nor we here doo 
like her going home. The Quene's Majestic hath three ships 
in the north seas to preserve the fishers from pirates. I thynk 
they will be sorry to see her pass.f 

My Lord of Penbrook is at his house now well amended. 
The Quene's Majesty doth well, thanked be God, although 
not well quieted with this mishap of the lady Catherine. 

And so I take my leave, from Smallbridg, Mr. Walgrave's J 
house, the 12th of August, 1561. 

Your Lordshipp's at command, 

W. CECIL. 

* Lady Catherine Grey, who had been secretly married to the Earl 
of Hertford, while the Queen was absent from court on a hunting 
party. Lord Hertford, immediately after the consummation of his 
marriage, went to France. On the discovery of her pregnancy, her 
husband, who had obeyed the summons to return, was sent to the 
Tower, as well as herself. Although confined apart, the Earl by some 
means or other obtained admission to his wife, who became, according 
to the peerage, the mother of three children by him. As they failed to 
bring witnesses of their marriage within a prescribed time, their mar- 
riage was declared null, and their children accordingly illegitimate. 
On the discovery of this intercourse while in confinement, Lord Hert- 
ford was fined by the Star-chamber fifteen thousand pounds, five for 
deflowering a virgin of royal blood, five for breaking his prison, and 
five for repeating the offence. See Ellis's Original Letters, 2nd 
Series, vol. ii. pp. 272-290, for some interesting letters relating to this 
event. 

t This, a confidential communication, is sufficient to overthrow en- 
tirely the imputation against Elizabeth and her minister, of having 
sent a fleet to intercept the Queen, which has been somewhat incon- 
siderately asserted. See also the instructions to the ships sent into 
" the narrow seas," printed in Haines, p. 366. 

^ Edward Waldegrave, Esq. of Smallbridge in Suffolk, ancestor of 



70 IRISH AFFAIRS. [AUG. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your good Lordship, your letters of the 8th 
of this month, sent by Sir William Fitzwillianis,f cam to the 
court with him on Tuesdaye last, being the 19th of this 
month. And uppon Wednesday, which was yesterday, cam 
by post your letters to hym and me, dated the 14th of this 
present. So as you may well judg how hard it was, and in 
many parts impossible, to address unto you such ayde as you 
required, with such spede as by your letters ye did specifye, 
which was by the 25th of this month. 

I saw small disposition here to be at any new chardg, for 
that there appeared so hard fruit of the former. And lack- 
yng my Lord of Penbrooke here, I was forced to take the 
burden uppon my shulders, and have induced the Quene's 
Majesty to address two hundred soldiors of the garrison of 
Barwyk, and to send awey Sir Wm. Fitzwilliams with three 
thousand, as I trust he shall bryng. 

As to any other chardg, I see her Majesty not to be in- 
duced, untill she may here agayne from your Lordship. 

Here is some offence taken, that where so manifest an error 
was upon the sufferance of Shane's chardg, yet no example is 
made thereof. It bredeth in the Quene's Majesty's heade some 
furder judgment of the matter than I wold. For God sake, my 
good Lord, bestyrr you, and recover this mishapp as you maye. 
I assure you I have, as it becometh me, diverted all the fault 
uppon the faynt souldiors, and am suer that the judgment of 
your Lordship is nowise to you prejudiciall. 

the present Earl of Waldegrave. He died on the 1st of September 
following, leaving two sons, both of whom we shall find a little later 
serving in Ireland. The Queen was at Smallbridge from the llth to 
the 13th of August. 

* Sir William Fitzwilliams was at this time treasurer under the 
Earl of Sussex. According to Campion, he was " a politicke and 
stoute gentleman." 



1561,] IRISH AFFAIRS. 71 

I pray God that I may here well of James Maconele. The 
Erie of Argile * hath remained in readiness all this year, to 
hearken whom you wold send to him for aid ; and as I 
perceive he imagyiieth that your Lordship allows not his 
offer of friendship, it were well done that he should not 
conceive mistrust. My Lord of Kildare comes over by 
license. I marvel he hath not paid the five hundred pound 
borrowed, f which your Lordship took upon you should be 
paid to the tresoror a good while past. The Scottish Queen 
passed by sea into Scotland the 19th of this month, and 
hath with her the Duke d'Aumale, Marquis d'Elboeuff, 
Grand Prior, and Monsieur d'Ampvile. These two return 
through this realm within thirty days. She hath no soldiors 
nor train, but a few household. She means to committ 
herself to the trust of her own. From Gosfeld,| the 21 of 
August, 1561. 

Your Lordship's at command, 

W. CECIL. 



THOMAS RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

I received your letters the first of this instant, and such 
other as came in the same paquett. I delivered the same day 
the Queue's Majesty's letter unto this Queen, and sent her 
Grace's answer unto our sovereign herewith. I have written 
unto the Queue's Majesty th'eifect of all such purposes 
as she had with me at two sondrye times, which tends to 
no other in words then amity and peace. Your Honour can 

* Archibald Campbell, fifth Earl of Argyll, a partisan of Mary, and 
enemy to the English. We shall find him treating for some time with 
O'Neal, and at last leaguing with him. 

t See note on Cecil's letter to Sussex, of 25th July, 1561, p. 66. 

J Gosfield, in Essex, was at this time a mansion of the Rich family. 
The Queen/^jgE^fe^e on the 19th and 20th of August, and seems to 
have 




72 MARY ARRIVES IN SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 

best judge of the lykelyhoode. Your Honour, as in the 
beginninge of your laste letter, greeved that you had no 
knowledge from me of the Quene's arrival,* but from Ber- 
wicke. I assure your Honour, yf you had not two lettres 
that bore date the 19th of August, both you and I are de- 
ceaved, for I am assured that I wrote one in the morninge, 
upon the fyrste assurance that she was in the gallies, and one 
in the after-none, two howers after she was landed, which I 
am sure came safely unto Mr. Valentine Browne's handes. 
I wold be lothe other men shold tayke the fruit of my travaile, 
as the Lord of Lidingeton can wytnes how I was once 
served in letters that shold have come to your handes. This 
I thought good to wryte, that your Honour maye knowe 
that I feare rather that I trouble you too oft, then that I leave 
anye thinge unwrytten that I judge my dutie chargeth me to 
make you privie of. 

Were your Honour exhorteth us to stowtenes, I assure you 
the voyce of one man is able in one hower to putt more ly f in 
us then five hundred trompettes contynually blusteringe in our 
eares. Mr. Knox spoke upon Tuesday unto the Quene. He 
knocked so hastelye upon her harte, that he made her weep, 
as well you knowe ther be of that sexe that wyll do that as 
well for anger as for greef, though in thys the Lord James 
wyll disagree with me. She charged hym with his book,f 
with his severe dealinge with all men that disagreed with 
hyni in opinions. She wylled hym to use more meeknes in 
his sermons. Some thyngs he spake unjo hyr contentation 
in myttigatyng the rigour of his book, and in some things he 
pleased her verie lyttle; in speciall spekinge agaynst the 
masse, he declared the greevous plagues of God that had 

* Mary Queen of Scots arrived in Scotland on the 19th of August, 
1561. 

t His book against "The monstrous regimen of women;" which 
had embarrassed him not a little with Elizabeth as well as with 
Mary. 



1561.] KNOX AND QUEEN MARY. 73 

fallen upcn all estates for committing of idolatry. He 
concluded so in th'ende with her, that he hath liberty to 
speak freely his conscience, to give unto her such reverence 
as becomes the minister of God unto the superior powers. He 
prayethe and has daily prayed for her as the preachers were 
wont to pray for Queen Marie, etc. The brute that he has 
caulked with the Queen makes the Papists dowte what 
\vyll become of the world. Yt likes not them well that I 
resort so oft unto the court. I have bin there thrice 
since Sunday. But of all they marvel most what traffic the 
Lord of Lidingeton makes with you. She herself has 
found three points necessary to maintain her state; first 
to make peace with England ; next to be served with the Pro 
testantes : in the other she finds not that that she looked for.* 
The third is to enrich her crown with the abbye lands. 
Which three if she do, what shall there lack in her (savinge 
a good howsebonde) to lead a happy life.f Saying your 
Honour has one with you, with whom you can consider 
these things better then I can write of them, I leave them 
to your judgements, and tawlke of some other matters. 

Upon Tuesday last she made her entry. She dynedinthe 
Castle. The first sight that she saw after she came out 
of the Castle was a boy of six years of age, that came as yt 

* On her first arrival in Scotland, the Queen made a show of throw 
ing herself into the arms of the Protestant party, apparently for the 
purpose of gaining time, that the French Court, who had just now 
enough on its hands, might be better enabled to aid her. Her dissi- 
mulation deceived both the Scotch and Elizabeth : Knox alone was 
not blinded by it. 

t It is impossible to make this passage, and very many others also, 
agree with the character of Randolph given by Lodge. Ill-used. i. p. 353. 
" He was of a dark intriguing spirit, full of cunning, and void of 
conscience ; there is little doubt that the unhappy divisions in Scotland 
were chiefly fomented by this man's artifices, for more than twenty 
years together." All the documents I have seen, show us Randolph 
as an honest and faithful servant of his mistress. 



74 QUEEN MARY'S RECEPTION. [SEPT. 

were from heaven owte of a rownde globe, that presented 
unto her a Bible 3 and Psaulter, and the keys of the gates, and 
spake unto her the verses which I sende you. There, for the 
terrible sygnifications of the vengeance of God upon idolatrie, 
therwer burnt Coron, Nathan, and Abiroii, in the tyme of their 
sacrifice. Thei were mynded to have had a priest burned at 
the altar, at the elevation. The Erie of Huntly stayed that 
pagient, but hathe playde many as wicked as that since he 
came hythyr. He bare that daye the sworde. Th'occasions 
whye the Duke and my Lord of Arran were absent, your Honour 
knowethe by the Lord of Lidingeton. The Quene takynge 
a great suspicion of the fortifyinge of Dombriton, and 
hathe sent one to see yt. I persuade what I can, both in 
worde and wrytynge, that they sholde shewe that obedi- 
ence unto her, that they wolde looke to have of other, if God 
put them in that place. I desyre them so to use themselves, 
that their frendes may thynke themselves worthy e of their 
kyndnes. Yf they come to scathe, yt wyl be trewe that of olde 
is sayde, Nemo l&ditur nisi a se ipso. What they are, that are 
named counsellors, I refer to the Lord of Lidingeton's report. 
James Steward's admission to be captain of the garde stayeth 
upon the Lord of Lidingeton's retorne, to certifye whether 
he be sworne Englishman. Your Honour maye see that when 
my penne runnethe of such matters, I have not muche more 
to wryte. Yesterdaye the Erie of Argile came to this towne : 
I canne as yet get no tyme to speake with hym, as I shall 
within one daye or two. The brute is here great of an over- 
throwe that divers of our men have had in Irelande. This daye 
ther communicated above ... of the Quene's councellers. 

Thus most humbly I take^my leave, desyryng your Honour 
to have in mynd what I wrote towelling my retorne, were 
the time ever so shorte. At Edenbourg, the 7th of Septem- 
ber, 1561. 

Your Honour's allwayse bounden andreddieto comaunde. 

THO. RANDOLPHS. 



1561.] RETURN OF HER FRENCH ATTENDANTS. 75 






THOMAS RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 



Although I wrote very lately unto your honour by Sir 
Peter Mewtes, and, at his being in Scotland, informed him 
as I could of all things of that country, yet for as my die 
as I have bin in this town at the receiving of the noblemen 
of France,* that this day departed towards the court, I 
thought yt my part to signify unto your honour th'occasion 
of my being here, and also what I have scene of the Queue's 
Majestie's officers, and those men's doings, that have charge 
in this place. 

Although Sir Peter Mewtes was well accompaynied to 
Edenbourge, with such captains as came thither with him, 
which were Mr. Tremayne, Mr. Cornwall, and Mr. Pregles, 
yet I thought yt nothing but honourable for him, if I should 
convoy him myself out of the country. I had also to 
confer at that time with the Deputy Warden concerning 
matters of the borders, of accusations made against the 
Lord Hume. Somewhat also I had to do with the Tree 
surer for my own particular, but most of all for that I knew 
yt was the Queue's Majestie's pleasure, that the noble 
men should be received unto her Highness honour, that I 
might be witness thereof, and do my endeavour to further the 
same. In doing whereof, I assure your Honour I never 
saw in men better wit nor more reddynes to set forth her 
Majestie's honour then was in them, for the number there were. 
The Marshall, Treasurer, and Controller, accompanied with 
dyvers gentlemen, met them somewhat without the bound 
rood, for so far the Lord James merrily promised me 
that theie would ride into English ground, as our men 
came into Scottish. The Deputy Warden with his com- 
pagnie, and the Vice-Marshall, passed not their limits. I 
met them before they came there, with some gentlemen with 
me, three miles before they came together. There were of 

* Those of Mary's attendants who have been before mentioned as 
intending to return through England. 



76 RECEPTION OF THE FRENCH AT BERWICK. [SEPT. 

the noblemen of Scotlande these, the Lord James and his 
two brytherne, the Erie of Morton, and Erie Bothwell ; Lords 
Bortwycke, Hume, Zester, about three hundred besydes the 
Frenchmen, as we guessed. 

At my fyrste cominge unto the Lord James, he desyred me 
that no token of unkyndenes myght be used ether to the Lord 
Hume or Bothwell, bycause that he proposed to convoye 
them as nere unto the walles as he myght. Hereof I as- 
sured hym that I wolde do my endevor, which was instantlye 
performed. At the metinge there were manie good words, 
and also at the departure. The Scottishe men never offerde 
to departe before theie had harde all the artyllerie shotte of, 
and stoode in the meane season within the shotte of the 
harquebuse to the towne ; it liked all men so well, that the 
Prior swore by his honour that he never hard thinge more royal 
Monsieur d'Anville sayde yt was worthye such a Prynces as 
my mestres was. Other ther were that sayde verie honorably 
their myndes in heringe of the greateste of the compaynie. 
Monsieur Priour requested me alwayes to be by hym. To all 
suche questions as he demanded, I answered as then I 
thoughte good. All thyngs were in suche good order, that I 
am sure he coulde rather envie yt then myslike y t. Monsieur 
d'Anville commended well the harquebusiers, for of them 
was the greateste number, the reste were armes pyquys. 
The maior and his bretherne mette them in the forcate ; * he 
gave them, and receaved good words agayne. In the Mar- 
shall ther lacked no good wyll to shewe that theie wer wel- 
come. The Treasurer, yf he did ever shewe himselfe noble, 
that day was his honour. He had in one liverie twenty persons 
well horsed, with partisanes. He lodged them in hys owne 
lodging, well furnished with all things, and plate inoughe. 
He gave them that nyght their supper, and breakfaste in the 
mominge ; not one that departed withowte hys belly full of 
good cheare. He gave unto eache of the noblemen a geld- 
inge better then anye theie brought owte of Scotlande. Theie 
* Fore-gate. 



1561] THE SCOTT.S DISLIKE THE MASS. 

were the ncxte mommgc as honourably put out of the 
town (savinge the number of great shot) as theie were re- 
ceaved. Thus your honour knowethe the manner of their inter- 
teynment in the Quene's Majestic' s town, at their first en- 
try. Theie themselves spake no less unto me of yt then it 
was. Monsieur Prior, because he knew that I was to return, 
desired me to tell the Queen of Scotland what honour had 
bin done unto them. By two of the Lord James's gentlemen, 
that he left of purpose byhynde to attend upon them until 
that theie were out of the town, both the noblemen wrote 
back unto the Queen. The Scottish lords went that 
night back to Cowdingehame.* I Jlearned by the way of 
the Lord James, that the Queen took their departure gre 
vously. She roose that morning to bid them farewell, and 
to her bed again. She lent unto the Grand Prior to 
accompaynie him, of her ladies, Seton, Beton, Liveston, and 
Flemmynge, as far as Seton, where they dined. That night 
they lay in Dombarre, and the Erie of Huntly coming that 
night out of the castle, as he saith himself, with a fall 
did put his arm out of joint. Some are so uncharitable 
that they wish that yt had bin his neck. He, theie say, 
dysturbyth the whole court. and yet is there not one that 
gyvcth him creditt. If this misfortune had not bin, he had 
come farther forward, and yet I assure you there is no man can 
tell whether he be hurt or not. 

Now that these Frenchmen are departed, we shall soon 
give a guess unto what issue things will grow. Her 
mass is terrible in all men's eyes. The Erie of Cassils 
said unto myself, that he would never here any more. I know 
not yet what mischief it may work. Her uncle the Marquis 
speaks great words. I se not in him to work any great 
matter. I find that there lacks no good will ether in her 
or him. Mr. Knox has written unto your honour his mind. 
I am not always of his opinion for his exact severity, 
and yet I find yt doth uioste good. She has mysliked 
* Coldingham, in Berwickshire. 



78 FRENCH INFLUENCE IN SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 

the Provost and Baylies of Edenbourge newe chosen, which 
liketh me never a whytte. What she myndeth farther yt can 
not be well savoured as yet. The povertie of her subjectes 
greatlye advancethe whatsoever she intendethe. 

From France comethe her whole counsell, what face so 
ever she beareth here. Thyther goethe St. Come, throughe 
England, as he thynkethe, to fette a newe lesson. The love 
to the Frenche is nothinge augmented by these men's beirige 
here, nor wyll much increase by the Marquis's tarryinge by- 
hynde. What for gayne or for favor she shall fynde manie frends. 
I here nothynge of the Duke or my Lord of Arran's cominge to 
the courte. The Erie of Argile lyketh nothynge in her. 

James Macconell, besydes that that he spake unto Sir 
Peter Mewtes, assurethe me that he wyll at all times be 
at the Quene my mestres's devoting. He had refusall of 
a requeste he made unto the Quene ; I knowe not yet what 
yt was. He made Monsieur d'Anville his meane. He 
hathe promysed me not to have to do in anye matter of 
Irelande that I shall not be privie unto. His opinion is 
that ther wyl be no great good done agaynst O'Nel, except 
he be invaded upon bothe sydes. Of the same mynde is also 
the Erie of Argile, who sayth unto me that y t were an easye 
matter to persuade Otho Macconell hymselfe and Maclane 
to take that enterprise in hande. Thus muche I wryte as I 
have harde of them, leavinge the consyderation therof unto 
your wysedoine. 

I have not further for thys tyme to trouble your honour, 
but that yt wyll please you to have in remembrance the 
Queue's Majestic my soverayne's warrant unto Mr. Trea- 
surer, that my allowance maye be monethlye advanced, for 
that Scotlande is no place where I can lyve withowte monye 
in my purse. He wyll, I truste, upon your honour's letter, 
shewe me some frendeshyppe therin. Great meanes is made 
bothe unto hym and me by Scottishemen for Englishe 
monye. Thoughe of hym I dowte not, and assure your 
honor of myselfe, yet I feare muche wyll goe that waye. 



1561.] THE KING OF SWEDEN EXPECTED. 79 

Thus most humbly I take my leave, reddy to return to- 
wards Edenburge, where I pray God that my service may be 
unto the Queue's Majestic, as I desire, and unto your honour 
so agreeable as the opinion that yt hath pleased your Honour 
to conceive of me. At Barwycke, 12th of September, 1561. 
Your Honour's to command as he is bound, 

THOSE. RANDOLPHE. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your good Lordship, I am somewhat per- 
plexed to see that errant rebel to have more favour of fortune 
than yourself in such exploits as by wisdom and good order 
be devised : first to have the hap to take Callogh O'Don- 
nil before your coming ; next to escape his ruin by coward 
nos of your men, when it seemed it was destined to him ; 
and now, lastly, to have benefit by the wandering of the 
ships sent with victell to Loughfoyle, whereof I remain 
still desyroose to here, .thinking surely that the great south 
west winds carryied them beyond the moole of Kantyre into 
the north of Scotland. 

I know your Lordship is much troubled herewith, and if 
it may ease you (as it doth in bearing of burdens) I doo 
bear no small part therein. 

Here be no great news. The King of Sweden was on the 
seas, and about the 8th of September blown homeward.* 
They say he is so ernest that he will come by land. Some 
of his treasure and horses be come to London. In Scotland 
the state of religion is by the Queue's proclamation permitted. 
In France religion abides great disputation. In the synod 
national at Poyssy, at the beginning whereof was pro 

* The expectation of the coming of the King of Sweden was now so 
great, that in Haines there is printed a draught of an order for the 
manner of his reception in London, dated Sept. 25, 15G1. 



NO ELIZABETH UNWILLING TO MARRY. [OCT. 

pounded an oration which I send your Lordship turned into 
English. 

The Queue's Majesty willeth me to signify to your Lord- 
ship her contentation to have my lady, your sister, in her 
court,* as one of her maydes of honor, if your Lordship will 
give order therin. 

I wrote to your Lordship that you might doo me pleasure 
to sell to me for redy money in the forest of Rockyngham 
some small number of okes towards the palyng of a little 
park. If you shall please to send me a wan-ant signed with 
your hand, I trust you will gyve me leave to sett to it your 
scale of office. 

The Grand Pryor and the Monsieur d'Ampvile will be at 
Barwyk the 9th of this moneth, to come in post this waye, 
and so to France. 

The Due d'Aumale is retorned into France with the 
gallies. 

The Quene of Scotland, as I here, is most governed by the 
Lord James and the Lord of Ledyngton. 

The Queue's Majestic remanyth still strange to allow of 
marriadge, wherin God alter her mynde ! Good my lord, 
lett your letters hyther conteyne more specialletie of your 
proceedings, for the shortnes thereof doth not so well content 
her Majestie. And so T take my leave of your good Lord- 
ship. From St. James's,f the 7th of October, 1561. 
Your Lordship's at command, 

W. CECILL. 

* The Lady Frances Ratcliffe, married to Sir Thomas Mildmay, is 
the only sister of the Earl of Sussex mentioned in the peerage. In a 
list of the Queen's jewels, &c. in 1587, preserved in the British Museum, 
we find the name of Mrs. Mary Ratcliffe as one of the Queen's gentle- 
women. 

t The Queen arrived at St. James's, in return from her progress, on 
the 22nd of September. 



1561.] QUEEN MARY AND HER NOBLES. 81 

THOMAS RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

In such matters as of late I have had to do before this 
Queen and her counsel, I have informed my Lords of the 
Quene's Majesty's honourable counsel, whereof your honour, 
for the place you are in, cannot be ignorant,. If any thing 
be omitted therein, or unsufficiently considered, I trust 
their honours will attribute it unto the little information that 
I had what to do therein, rather then that there lacks care 
or diligence in me to do that as it ought to be. I leave there- 
fore farther to write thereof, to trouble your honour the 
longer in some other matters that occasion is presented 
unto me to write of. The absence of the Duke's grace 
from this court caused here such brute and rumours amongst 
the people, of his mislykinge of the Quene's proceedings, with 
somewhat else that they unadvisedlye reported that was mente 
towards him, that he was advised by his friends to repair 
unto this town, and by his presence to make void all such 
vain taulke as was here in maynie men's mouths. Upon 
Tuesday last, (thefourthe of this instant,) he came unto this 
town. Upon Wensdaye he saw the Queen, and was well re- 
ceaved, and, as he confesses him unto me, no manner of 
occasion offered unto him by the Queen of myslykinge. Since 
that time he has been daily in court and counsel. How- 
beit, his purpose is not to remain here above six or eight 
days more. He doubts greatly that the Queen intends to 
take from him Dombriton ; and so thinks himself void 
of all place of succour, if this Queen intende at any time 
to tayke quarrel against him. " For," says he, " when 
ever she have that out of my hands, I know that her mind 
towards me and my hows cannot be good. I will, therefore, 
assure myself by all means that I can to keep that, which," 
saith he, " I shall not be able to do, except your mestres 
at that time stand gracious princes unto me, who has 
promised me by her letters never to se me nor my house 
wrecked." Though I know that he doutethe more then 

VOL. i. G 



82 TURBULENCE OF THE SCOTS. [NOV. 

he have occasion, yet wolde I no manner of waye con- 
demne hys purpose, nor thought yt good anye waye to 
dyscourage hym of the Queue's Majestie's favour so longe 
as he persevere in the mayntenance of God's trothe, obe- 
dience to hys soveraigne, and affection towards my mestres 
accordinge unto her demerites upon hym and hys sone. In 
thys behalfe he spake inough. He required me verie 
ernestlie to advertyse your Honour herof, and yf it seme 
good unto you, to open the same unto the Quene's Majestie, to 
knowe what her Grace wyll do for hym, yf he be brought unto 
that necessitie to tayke the parte for hys refuge ; and 
thereof desyrethe your Honour's answer and favorable word 
unto her Majestie. I inquired of hym what right he had to 
have l.:at place, or pretence to refuse the deliverie yf yt 
were demanded. He answered me that hys right was none, 
but that he tooke yt from the Earle of Lenox, and had a pro- 
mes by mouthe made unto hym by thys Quene's mother to 
have yt in ferme for nineteen yeres. Of thys matter he hathe 
byne twyse in hand with me since his arrivall. I coulde 
promisse hym no lesse then to wryte unto your Honour ; the 
reste I refer unto your wysedome. My Lord of Arrane re- 
maynethe at St. Andrews. He knowethe not hymself, nor 1 
cannot conjecture, what he meaneth by hys aboode there. 

He wrote of late unto the counsell that he might be an- 
swered of the revenues of St. Andrews, Domfermelinge, and 
Murosse by the Quene's authoritie, as theie had put hym in 
possession, adding thys clause, that otherwyse he wolde com- 
playne unto hys bretheren, who from the begynninge had 
bene of the congregation. Thys manner of doinge was 
founde verie strange. Hys bill was rejected, and nothingesaide 
thereunto. It ys nowe called in question whether that the 
Princesse beinge an idolater maye be obeyed in all civile and 
pollitique actions. I thynke mervilously of the wysdoine of 
God that gave thys unrulye, unconstant, and combersome 
people no more substance nor power then theie have, for then 
wolde theie runne wilde. Nowe theie imagine that the Lord 



1561.] DISTURBANCE AT THE MASS. 83 

James growcthe cold, that he aspirethe to great matters. He 
is now Lieutenant upon the borders, Commander of the 
Queue, like shortly to be Erie of Murray and Treasurer 
of Scotland. Lidingeton ambitious and too full of policy. 
So there is no remedy, say theie, yt must yet come to a 
new day. To the contrary of this I persuade by all means 
that I can, with such as I may most assuredly have to 
doo. And in my conscience theie are in the wrong to the 
Lord James. And whenever Lidingeton is taken owt of 
this place, theie shall not find amongst themselves so fit 
a man to serve in this realm. 

My Lord of Arrane hath been oft persuaded with to 
conform himself to this estate and time. My sayings have 
been always unto him that the greater tokens of obedience 
that he show now unto his Sovereign, the better shall he 
be able to govern, and the people know their duty, if 
God send him unto that place. I find my words better 
allowed then followed of him. He desyrethe greatly to 
speak with me. Nether this time, nor the place where he 
is, servethe me thereunto, though I be willing enough when 
occasion better servethe then now yt doth. 

I wrote unto your Honour that the provost and bayles of 
this town were deposed. We look now daily to have 
them restored, and the self same confirmed that theie were 
put out of their office for. Upon Alhalowe day, the Queen 
had a songe mass. That night one of her prestos was well 
beaten for his reward by a servant of the Lord Robert's. 
We look to have yt proclaimed again that no man, under 
payne of confiscation of goods and lands here, say or come 
unto her own mass, savinge her own household, that 
came out of France. The ministers shall have their livings 
appointed by her autoritie. These matters are presently in 
hand. The Lord James upon Friday takes hysjorneye 
towards Gedbrough ; there go with him the Erie Morton, 
Lord Ersken, Earl Bodwell, Lord Seton, Lord Leveson. 
Th'assemble will be great, and I trust great good will ensue 

G 2 



84 MARY AND ELIZABETH [NOV. 

thereof. I have receaved answer from all the wardens of the 
opposite Marches fornenst Scotland, that proclamation is 
made agaynst fugitives, which I have declared unto thys 
Queue, who was verie gladd thereof. 

As I thought thus to have ended, ther wer sent unto me 
your letters of the 26th of November, brought by La Crock, 
who, as the Lord of Lidingeton geveth me to understande, 
hathe made verie honorable reporte of the Queue's Majestie 
my soveraigne. 

The Lord James also confinnethe the same with manie 
merrie words, that thys Quene wished that one of the two 
were a man, to make an end of all debates. .Thys I trowe 
was spoken in her merrie moode. Yesterdaye I sought 
occasion to have spoken with her Grace myself, but she was 
busye abowte St. Gome's despache into France, who within 
two dayes taketh his jorney. Her Grace purposeth to 
wryte unto the Queue's Majestie herself with her owne hande. 
St. Gome's arrant into France is to understande the state 
of things ther, to fashion as nere as she maye all things 
accordinglie here, to intertayne amytie by kinde wordes, and 
to fette newe instructions howe matters shal be governed 
here. To speake of hymself, he is gentle and honeste inoughe, 
but not withoute suspicion of over great ambition, which 
maye move hym by all wayes that he can to serve hyr appe- 
tyte. We retaine our olde familiaritie, and accordingly I 
muste neades commende hym unto your Honour. This 
Queue* longethe greatly to here of the Queue's Majestie's 
resolution touching Sir Peter Meute's legation. 

I have nowe some occasion, by reason of your letter, to 
saye somethinge, yf she enter with me in purpose of hym, as 
she hathe done twyse or thryse since hys d parture. I have 
made bothe the Lord James and Lord of Lidingeton privie of 
my Lord of Bedford's intertaynment and courtoysie towards 
the Grande Prior and Monsieur d'Ampville ; theie leave no- 
thynge unspoken thereof unto the Quene in as good words as 
theie can. I heare that the newes she hathe of the Cardi- 



1561.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 85 

nail's and Duke's leaving the court pleasantly her but little. 
All men here judge the tyine of the year paste for the King 
of Sweden's coming, thougheof late the brute was great that 
he was arrived at Dunkirk. 

I have done your Honour's commendations unto the Lord 
James and the Lord of Lidingeton. I have also saluted the 
Duke's Grace in your name, for so I thought it requisite. 
Such of the Lords as have their hostages* at Newcastle, 
purpose shortly to write unto the Queue's Majestic for the 
deliverance of them, forasmuch e as the year is no we ne'er 
expired. I persuaded with the Lord James to let the year 
first run out before any such thing were moved. Others 
thought it best out of hand to avoid charges. I leave 
yt at their discretions, and am not sure whether that thaye 
will write by St. Come or not. To-morrowe I shall know 
their resolution. 

There restethe nothing that I can call unto my remem- 
bronco but to give your Honour most humble thanks for your 
favourable remembrance of my licence for horses and the aug- 
mentation of my diets here. I trust there shall be nothing 
left thereof unspent as ne'er as I can to the Queue's Majes- 
tie's honour. Unless yt please you at any time to have me 
in remembrance unto Mr. Treasurer, I shall find him harde 
and slack enough. He has as maynie fair words as 
good deeds. 

I am here sore comberde by a mischievous man, one Tom- 
son, of whom long since I wrote unto your Honour. He 
is a plain anabaptiste, and al most out of his wit. 

I leave for this present farther to trouble your Honour, 
until you see the Lord of St. Come. Most humbly I take my 
leave; at Edenbourge, the 4th of November, 1561. 

Your honour's bounden and reddy always to com- 
mande, THO. RANDOLPH i; 

* The hostages given by the Scottish Lords when the English army 
entered Scotland to their aid in 1560. 



IRISH REBELLION SUPPRESSED. [DEC. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your honourable good Lordship, lyke as my 
greeff was not small, to wryte my last letters about the four- 
teenth hereof, so am I now well releaved, though not fully sa- 
tisfyed, because it appeareth not by any your letters clearly, 
howe Shane and you be accorded, nether how Armagh is 
left,* nor who commeth with hym. I assure your Lordship 
the tales of townsmen report more certenly, than otherwayes 
I here. 

I have had somewhat to doo to get you licence to come, and 
without direction to discharg her Majesty from the justice 
fee, it wold not be gotten, and yet I had assistance of the 
counsel therein. Untill your Lordship shall come, I see that 
her Majesty will not send for the Erles of Ormond and Des- 
mond, f Her Majesty thinketh her realme shall be unfur- 
nished, if the Erie of Ormond shall come now in your ab- 
sence. Good my Lord, furnish yourself with good matter to 
excuse the lack that is found in this last yere's service, and 
forgett not the notable default of Jacques Wyngfeld,I for it 
remayneth here in memory, and for your lack in proceeding 
agaynst hym, some blame is noted in you. And so trustyng 
shortelie to see you, I end. From Westminster, this 18th of 
December, 1561. 

Lett a perfect declaration be brought of the Quene's Ma- 
jestic' s dett there. 

Your Lordship at command, 

W. CECILL. 

* Campion says, O'Neil burned the metropolitan church of Armagh, 
because no English army might lodge therein, for which sacrilege the 
primate accursed him. 

t The dissensions between these two earls gave great trouble to the 
government in Ireland, and rise to a formidable series of rebellions. 

J Third son of Sir Richard Wingfield, of Kimbolton. He was at 
this time master of the ordnance and a privy councillor in Ireland. 



1561.] SHANE O'NEIL AT COURT. 87 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF StfpSEX. 

May yt please your honourable good Lordship, it hath been 
thought mete that Shan O'Neyle should yesterday e in an oppen 
presence in the afternoon come and submit himself, and re- 
ceyve pardon. * Wherein there was had consideration of you, 
or else the matter might have fallen out unmete both for her 
Majestic and you. He came to the town about Thursday e 
before. On Saturday he cam to the Lord Kipper's house, where 
were with the Lord Keeper, the Lord Marquis of Northampton, 
the Earl of Penbrook, the Vice-Chamberlayn, and poor I. 
There he humbly required that we wold be means for him 
to come to her Majesty's presence to acknowledge his obe- 
audience. After some sharp rehearsal to him of his general 
faults, we promised him our means. We wold not suffer him 
to reply for his defence, meaning to leave that until your 

* " Now," saith Camden, " was Shan O'Neal come out of Ireland, 
to perform what he had promised a year before, with a guard of ax- 
bearing Galloglasses, bare-headed, with curled hair hanging down, 
yellow surplices dyed with saffron, long sleeves, short coats, and 
hairy mantles ; whom the English people gazed at with no less admi- 
ration than now adays they doe them of China and America. He 
being received with all kindness, and falling down at the Queene's 
feet, confessed his crime and rebellion with howling, and obtained 
pardon." When, however, he was accused of treachery towards his 
brother, he defended himself resolutely. The leniency with which 
Shane O'Neil was treated, had rather an ill effect, than otherwise, 
for he returned to his clan rather as a king than a subject, with an ac- 
knowledged authority over them ; and though he used his strength at 
first against the Hebridean Scots, the queen's declared enemies, it was 
soon felt that he did not act in mere duty to Ms sovereign. It may be 
observed here, that in his account of Shane's rebellions, Camden seems 
to be incorrect and confused, particularly in his chronology. 

Campion says that the English courtiers, noting the haughtiness and 
barbarity of O'Neil, " devised his style thus: ' O'Neile the great, 
cousin to St. Patrick, friend to the Queen of England, enemy to all 
the world besides.'" 



SHANE REBELS AGAIN. [JAN. 

Lordshipp come. So I thought mete that his submission 
shuld be both in Irish and English, which he made uppon 
his knees, and first prostrat uppon his face. 

I perceyve, by secret meanes, he will make the King's let- 
ters patents voyde to Mathew, because there was none such by 
the name of Mathew alias Fearderogh O'Neyle, sonne of 
Connace. 

Iperceyve beside that he will alledg that the people of 
the countrey never accorded therto. 

Theis thyngs your Lordshipp may thynk of, and so I take 
my leave. He hath here one thousand pound, and laboreth 
to have other five hundred. From Westminster, 7th Januar. 
1561. 

Your Lordshipp's at command, W. CECILL. 



SHANE MACGUIRE* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

In my moste harthy f maner I humbly recommend me unto 
your Lordshyppe, and the causse of me wouryting J unto you 
att this tyme is satisfyng your Lordshippe that I have your 

* The letters of Macguire, (who was lord or chief of Fermanagh, 
had suffered by Shane O'Neil's tyranny and violence, and sought shel- 
ter in the protection of the English,) and of the bailiffs of Dundalk, 
(a town which was particularly obnoxious to the rebel chieftain,) will, 
no doubt, be thought extremely curious, and give a most interesting 
picture of the melancholy condition of Ireland at this period. The 
orthography and language of Shane Macguire is peculiarly Irish. 

Camden observes, of the transactions of this year, that Shane, puffed 
up with his success against the Scots, " began to exercise tyranny 
over the petty lords of Ulster. Armach, the metropolitan city of Ire- 
land, he defaced with fire, in hatred to the archbishop. Macguire he 
drove out of his ancient inheritance, making a prey of Macgeniss and 
others. Whose protection, when the English undertooke, he tooke 
up the banner of rebellion against the Queene, which, by the persvva- 
sion of Sir Thomas Cusac, Knight, he soone layde downe againc, and 
returned to his obedience, delivering his sonne for hostage." 

t Hearty. J Writing. 



1562.] IRISH LETTERS OF SHANE MACGUIRE. SJ) 

Lordship is l letter, wherein I doo perseve your Lordship is 
good will towards me, and as touching any difference that is 
betowyn 2 me and O'Relly, I will by orders 3 as Sir Thomas 
Cusake will say in all things. Your Lordship shall un 
derstande that it greves me greatly that ye are so lunge in 
this realm, and that I could not have lesyre to goo to visit 
your Lordship, because of choose onhappy wars that I am 
bysethe 4 withal, for I doo promise unto your Lordship by 
the fayghett 5 that I doo owe to God, that Shan o'neill is 6 
tenants did me more hurd senes ? this last piece 8 than ever 
he did while I had open war with him, and I doo promise you 
that I am upon me kypying 9 every day senes his coming to 
Erlond. 10 But your Lordship shall understand that I 
might doo him much hurd 11 sense his departing, if it were 
not for feared 12 of your Lordship is displeasure. This I will 
desire you point 13 whathe 14 day your Lordeshyppe will 
point me to goo to speak with your Lordship. 

Your Lordship shall understand that I did send the 
best hawk of this country unto my Lady your bedfelow 
be your futheman, 15 and another fellow, to cary the said goose 
hawk in his company, and I would desire you to know of 
your man what was don with the said goshawk.* 

No more unto your Lordship at this tie me, butt Almighty 
God preserve and kyppe you. Woryten the fifteenth day of 

August. 

Be your deli orator and pore bedman, 10 

SHAN MAGUYR. 



; Lordship's. 2 Between. 3 Be ordered. 4 Beset. 5 Faith. 
6 His. 7 Hurt since. 8 Peace. 9 Upon my keeping, on my guard. 
10 Ireland, (i. e. on his return from England.) "Hurt. 12 Fear. 
13 Appoint. 14 What. 15 Footman. l6 Bedesman. 

* An Irish hawk and an Irish hound were at this period much 
coveted by the English nobility for their excellence, and were the or- 
denariate acknowledgments sent by or requested as a favour from an Irish 
chief. The exportation of hawks was the subject of legislative enact 



90 HUSH HAWKS. [OCT. 

THE BAILIFFS OF DUNDALK TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Our humble duety premised unto your honorable Lordshipp. 
And where information was gyvin to your Honor that sum 
of Shane O'Neylls men shoulde stell certen bevys from the 
ward of Armagh e, we certefy your Honor that the same are 
restored. For certen of our townsmen that were yesterday at 

ment ; in 1480, a duty of 13*. 4,d. was placed for every goshawk, 
6*. 8d. for every tiercel, and 10s. for each falcon, exported out of Ire- 
land; besides "poundage accordingly." "The hawks of Ireland, 
called goshawks," says Fynes Morrison, " are much esteemed in 
England; and they are sought out by many, and all means to be 
transported thither." Derrick, in " The Image of Ireland," written 
in 1578, and published in 1581, thus celebrates the seven varieties of 
hawks bred in Ireland, which he observes, are " peerless for speedi- 
ness of wing." 

" Of hawkes retaining sondrie names 
The countrie store doeth breede, 
Whose names, if pacience will abide, 
In order shall proceed. 

The goshawke first of all the crewe 

Deserves to have the name ; 
The faucon next in high attemptes, 

In glorie,andin fame. 

The tar sell then ensueth on, 

Good reason 'tis that he, 
For flying hawkes in Ireland, next 

The faucon plaste should bee. 

The tarsett gentePs course is nexte, 

The fourthe peere of the lande, 
Combined to the faucon with 

A lover's friendly bande. 

Thepretie marlion is the fifth, 

To her the sparhawke nexte, 
And then ihejacke, and musket laste, 

By whom the birds are vexte. 

These are the hawkes which chiefly breed 

In fertile Irishe grounde ; 
Whose matche for flight and speedie wyng, 

Elsewhere be hardly founde. 1 " 



1562.] SHANE O'NEIL'S DEPREDATIONS. 91 

Armage, as they were returning from Shane, praying him 61' 
restitution of a pray that sum of McMahonn's* men made 
upon us a Friday last past, showed us thereof. And they 
fained that the bevies ware scatteryd abroad by wolffs,t and 

In 1568, the Queen addressed a letter to Sir Henry Sidney, (the origi- 
nal of which was in the possession of the late Lord Kingsborough,) in 
which her Majesty states that in the second year of her reign she did 
grant to her cousin, Fernando de Castro, Marquis of Saria, in Spain, 
descended of the royal blood of Lancaster, two goshawks and four 
greyhounds, to be delivered by the Lord Deputy of Ireland, for which 
purpose letters patent were passed, and which grant is to be annual. 
" And because," continues the Queen, " we consider that sometime 
without foresight and care had, the said hawks specially can not be in 
readiness at times convenient, we think it were well done both for that 
and further pleasuring of us, persons dwelling in the parts where the 
said hawks are to be had, might be enjoined or induced by some 
goodmeanes yearly to yield unto us, as it were by way of some service 
or rent, such number of hawks as might conveniently be had. The 
devise whereof we remitt to your own discretion." It may be added, 
that the chief rent paid formerly for the Island Magee, was a pair of 
goshawks and a pair of gloves. 

In 1634, the law authorities in Ireland were directed to prepare an 
act to restrain " The stealing of great hawks or taking of hawks with 
nets, &c." And in a letter printed in the Rawdon Papers, iii. 17, from 
the Bishop of Derry to the Lord Deputy Wentworth, dated 30 May, 
1635, the Bishop says, " I have drawn an eyry of hawks for fear of 
stealing, but because they are not so ready, I forbear the other a 
while, and will send them together very shortly." 

* " The county of Monaghan," says Fynes Morrison, ' ' was in- 
habitat by the English family Fitzutsi, and these are become degene- 
rate and barbarous, and in the sense of that name are in the Irish 
tongue called Mac Mahon, that is, the sons of bears." Stanyhurst, in 
his rude but favourite hexameter verse, laments the death of his 
most dear cousin,' the Lord Louth, " who was traitorously murdered 
by Mackmaughoun," an Irish lording, about the year 1577. 

" Though Sydney and Delwyn the murder partly revenged, 
A loss sopretiouse may not bee fully requited; 
The death of a thousand Maghounds is unequal amendment." 

t Wolves were at this period very abundant in Ireland. Smith, 
in his history of Kerry, tells us that these " animals were not entirely 
extirpated until about the year 1710, as, he adds, " I find by present- 



92 WOLVES IN IRELAND. [OCT. 

two of them that is nat restored to be ettin* by the said 
wolffs. Nevertheles he saithe he will se them satisfied 
thereof. So that we nede nat send any bevys at this tyme. 
And as concerning our pray made by McMahonn' s men as 
afforsaid, he will never se cow restored, nor he wold not have 
loked uppon our letter, but sent it backe again undisclosed, 
calling us false chorlys, with other vile names, wherfor we 
pray your Honor to direct your strait commandement to 
McMahonn, willing and commanding him to restore our said 
pray. The names of them that made the pray are Neyll 
Ogef McNeyll, Morice O'Neyll, and the sons of Evyr, son to 
Hughe Roo McMahonn. And the number of the pray is 
fifty kyne and four gerrans. And thus we humbly take leve. 
From Dundalke, this 8th of October, 1562. 

Your humbles, 

STEPHEN CASSELL, and 
JAMES DILLON, 

Bayllyves. 

ments for raising money for destroying them in some old grand jury 
books." It has been stated to the editor that so late as 1740, wolves 
were killed on the western end of the range of the Galtee mountains, 
county of Tipperary. 

Derrick, in his Image of Ireland, 1581, observes that there are 
" greate store of wolves in Irelande." 

" No beastes, (I saie,) which do possesse 

One jote of crewell kinde, 
Except the wolfe that noisome is, 
In Irishe soile I finde." 

The Irish, according to Camden, sometimes chose wolves to be 
their gossips, terming them Chari Christi, praying for them, and wish- 
ing them well ; and having contracted this intimacy, professed to 
have no fear of danger from their four-footed allies. 

Fynes Moryson, 1603, speaking of wolves in Ireland, observes that 
" the destruction whereof being neglected by the inhabitants, op- 
pressed with greater mischiefs, they are so much grown in number as 
sometimes in winter nights they will come to prey in villages and the 
suburbs of cities." 

* Eaten. t Ogeis equivalent to our word junior. 



1502.] SHANE MACGUIRE'S IRISH LETTERS. 93 

SHANE MACGUIRE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

After all due reverence, as me due obedience, I humbly 
recommend me uoto your Lordship. This is to certify your 
Lordship, that at the wouryting of this bill, Shan O'Nell did 
send me his on cousin l proffering me to make amends in all 
the damage that he and all his men did unto me country 
senes this war began, and forgive me all the ofenceys 2 that I 
did against him, upon the condyssion that I should yield 
myself unto him as true servant and subject. Butt mine 
answer was this unto his servanth, that as lunge as I lie ve 
that I will never forsake your Lordship, thell 3 your honour doo 
forsake me. Wherefore I know well that within this four days 
the said 4 Shan will come to destroy me country, excepth 
your Lordship will sethe 5 some remedy in this mather, 6 be- 
checthing 7 you to send your good advise unto us abuthe this 
mothers, for excepeth that your Lordship will sye to 
this mothers, I shall be caste away, other else I most yield 
myself unto him. Desiring your Lordship, and if it be 
possibell, to send me a good horse that I may trust upon, 
and if I lyve I will deserve y tt att your Lordship is hands. 
No more unto your Lordship att this time, butt Almighty God 
send us good mytynge. 8 Woryten in the castle of Maguyr, 
the 9th day of October, 

Be your daily orator and poor bedeman, 

SHAN MAGUYR. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH.* 

Sir, sense your departure, here was some difficulties con- 
corning the passadg into Normandy. The prince of Condee 
1 Own cousin. 2 Offences. Till. 4 Said. 

5 Set. 6 Matter. 7 Beseeching. 8 Meeting. 

* Sir Thomas Smith, the eldest son of John Smith, of Walden, in 
Essex, was one of the most universally accomplished scholars of this 
age, which was by no means poor in learned men. He was an upright 



94 THE ENGLISH OCCUPY NEWHAVEN. [OCT. 

sent special! commandement to Newhaven,* that our men 
should not enter by his authoritie. Theis tydings cam to us 
the 26th of the last ; heruppon wer we all a baye, but yet 
within twelve howres we found such comefort otherwise, 
as order was gyven for our men to take shipping , and so 
Adrian Poynings to go over with them, and take with hym 
a wrytyng from the Queen's Majesty under the great scale, the 
copy whereof is sent to you herewith. Then came the wynd 
the south that none cold pass. Newes came from Depe and 
Newhaven of the constabl's coming to besege Roone,t and for 
lack of our men all thyngs grown desperate, and so contynued 
to our gret greeif here, untill the 3rd of this month ; and then 
passed over two thousand and four hundred, after the em- 

and able minister, and during the reigns of Edward VI. and Elizabeth, 
he was twice secretary of state, and thrice ambassador in France. 
He died in 1577. He was sent to the French court the 1st of Sep- 
tember of 1562. 

* Scotland, during the greater part of the present year, presents to 
us only a scene of half-smothered jealousies, both in matters of re- 
ligion and in its state affairs. The attentions of the English govern- 
ment were turned chiefly to France, where the Protestant party, 
headed by the prince of Conde and the Admiral, were obliged to take 
up arms to defend themselves from the oppressive faction of the 
Guises. Elizabeth agreed to support the former, on condition they 
should deliver into her hands the town and castle of Havre, then 
called by the English Newhaven, which she resolved to keep until 
Calais, which had been retained from her contrary to solemn treaty, 
should be delivered. On the 1st of March, 1563, happened the cele- 
brated massacre of Vassy, " the beginning of the troubles of France." 
The command of Newhaven was given to Ambrose Dudley, Earl of 
Warwick, elder brother of Lord Robert Dudley. 

f The queen-mother of France, " to prevent the English passing 
further into the kingdom, persuaded the King of Navarre, the Duke 
of Guise, and the constable, to turn their arms against Rouen before 
they laid siege, as had been proposed, to Orleans. Her counsel in 
this instance was listened to, and Rouen besieged towards the end of 
September, 1562; about 2000 of the English troops from Havre and 
Dieppe are said to have previously arrived there to strengthen the 
garrison." Nares Burghhy. 



1562.] THE EARL OF WARWICK GOES TO NEWHAVEN. 95 

barking of whom that day we cold never here ether of our 
men or our ships until this morning, the 10th of October. 
During this time the wind continued so northerly, that 
110 passengers cold come from the cost, and upon those con- 
trariouse accidents, have I forborne to depeche towards you, 
nether have I herd from you sense your being at Callis. 

I trust now some passynger will bring us word from all 
those forth placees, and so weary of scribbling I end. 10th 
October, 1562. Yours assuredly to command, 

W. CECIL. 

My Lord of Warwyk passes to the sea side on Monday. 
I send you a ciphre triplicated, one betwixt him and you. 

P.S. Whore sexta post merid. I understand from Deep, 
that the Mont at St. Catharynes is lost by treason, and the 
battery is lead to the town walls at Roan. Deep is very 
weke, and the fortifications not perfect. Eight hundred of 
ours shall pass thither, the fourteenth hereof : there be already 
six hundred of ours, three score horsemen of Scot 

Mr. Winter is gone ere now to Deep to consider of 

the * . . wis shall be ready to embark for Deep on 

Tuesday. 



SIR WILLIAM CECIL TO 



Sir, I know very well, that your abode there, without 
oftener advertisements from hence, must needs be grievous unto 
you, and yet the only fault hereof is these varieties of the affairs 
in France, which have so turned both ourselves and our 
counsel here into so many shapes from time to time, as I 
could never, until this present, make any certain account what 
I might write to you hereof. 

True it is that for my own part I have used all the advise 
I could to procure some quiet end in these French matters, 
because I have scene from the beginning, that the process 
of them one ways ended wold be a beginning of our trebles, 

* The letter is here torn. 



90 THE ENGLISH OCCUPY NEWHAVEN. [OCT. 

and as it maye appear unto you, when the Guisians wold 
gyve no eare, but followe their intents by force. It hath bene 
seiie mete to the Queue's Majestic by the advise of all her 
counsaile to sett in her foote, and to preserve the miserable 
state of her poore neighboures in Normandy with a buckler 
of her defence. 

The matter hathe ben long in consultation, and diverse 
tymes broken of, with hope of some good end in Fraunce ; 
but now fynding that desperate, the Quenes Majestic hathe 
determined to send over the Earle of Warwick, with six 
thousand footemen, three thousand with himselfe to Newhaven 
and the other three to Deepe. It is ment to kepe Newhaven 
in the Queue's possession untill Callice be eyther delyvered, 
or better assurance of it then presently we have. And herein 
both justice and pollicy shall mayntien our actions ; for as 
for Callice, by meanes the Frenche have broken the treaty 
with us, we may be bold presently to demand it, and if thereof 
arguments shall arise I think the Queue's Majestic nead not 
be ashamed to utter her right to Newhaven as parcell of the 
Duchie of Normandy. 

Nothing is ment here on our parte to make any invasion 
but to enter quietly into these peeces, which by lawe of armes 
we may, considering we take none of them by force ; and as 
long as the French shall give no other cawse, it is ment to 
use no warre towardes them, but to allowe of mutuall tra- 
fique betwixt bothe the nations. 

By the Queue's Majestie's letter to that King, and her pri- 
vate unto you, and by the declaration which also shal be 
sent you with another wri tinge delivered by her Majestic to 
her Lieutenant now sent into Normandy, you shall well un- 
derstand the cawses of her Majestie's doings, as the same 
may be avowed to the world ; and of all these two princi- 
pally, one to stay the Duke of Guise, as our swome enemy, 
from his singular superioritie, th'other to procure us the res- 
titution of Callice, or something to countervale it. 

The last moneth Mr. Henry Knolles was sent into Almain 
with commission to joyne with Christopher Mount, and to 



Io62.] ELIZABETH AND MARY OF SCOTLAND. 97 

solicit the Princes Protestants both to aid the Prince of 
Condo, and lo consider how the common rawse of relligioii 
ihight be defended against any common confederacy of the 
enemy. 

He hath already ben with the Palsgrave, and, having 
found him very earnest in both the causes, is gone towards 
the Rhensgrave, and the Duke of Saxe, and as I perceive 
shall mete with the rest of the Princes at Franckforth the 
beginning of the next month, where the Emperor and Max- 
imilian shall be, to compass the assent of the Princes to 
make Maximilian King of Romains, wherein time shall 
better declare what will succeed, then privately I dare 
affirm. 

The matters betwixt the Queue's Majestic, and the Queen 
of Scots, rest in these terms. The Quene's Majestic was 
contented in June to accord upon an interview in August, 
with the Queen of Scots, coming to Nottingham, so as the 
matters in France look good ; and before the last of July, 
and because at that time the trobles grew to be more des- 
pirate, the interview was disappointed, and so excuse was 
sent to the Queen of Scots by Sir Henry Sidney,* with 
offer to mete at York betwixt midsomer and the end of 
August, which is like to succeed as the planets of France 
shall be disposed. And nevertheless I find the Queue's Ma- 
jestie here so well disposed to keep amity with the Queen 
of Scots, as suerly the default of their two agreements shall 
not grow from the Queen here. 

Her Majestic writes to her at this present, and make 
eth such distinction in her proccdings, as on the one part 
she makes her well assured of her love towards her, and 011 
the other she notes plainly and frankly her offence to- 

* Sir Henry Sidney was the son of Sir William Sidney, of Penshurst 
in Kent, and married Mary Dudley, sister of the Earl of Leicester. He 
was one of the most distinguished statesmen of his time, and was 
Knight of the Garter, President of Wales, and Deputy of Ireland. 

VOL. I. II 



98 INTRIGUES OF THE SPANISH AMBASSADOR. [OCT. 

wards the Guises, which she so tempereth by her letters of her 
owne devise to the Queue of Scotts, as I think she shall have 
cause to think well of the Queue's Majestic, and to lament 
her uncle's foolish proceedings. The said Quene of Scotts, 
upon the disappointment of the interview, made her progresse 
into the north parts of Scotland, where she hath as I heare 
ministred both justice, and lost not by her journey, as you 
know the Quene her mother was wont to do upon the fron- 
tiers. The intelligence betwixt this and that realme remayn- 
eth in the same good tearmes as heretofore it did, and so 
is lyke to continue, as I think, untill the Frenche seede be 
sowen to make division. 

Here was of late spread abroade by some maliciouse 
heades, a tale how the Lord James should kill the Queue's 
Chaplain, for saying masse in a place out of the Quene' s pre- 
sence, and being sent for by the Quene by the capten of her 
garde, he shuld also kyll hym. But these tales were all feyned, 
and therefore if any of them be carried over thither, you may 
discredytt them ; for true it is he remayneth in the principall 
credyttwith the Quene, and carieth the burden of the govern- 
ment, constant enough in relligion, though not so rash as -this 
tale wold signify. 

Now will I touch e the matter of the ambassador's secre- 
tary here unto you, who, as you write, is not born under the 
dominion of King Phillipp. The whole circumstance of that 
matter is very long, but yet I will wryte some parte therof. It 
seemeth that the secretary had some spark of conscience, and 
finding the ambassador so fully bent in all his negotiations 
to diminish the reputation of the Quene and this realme, by 
multitude of practises and lyes contynually sent over bothe into 
the Lowe Countries and Spayne, and also to Rome and other 
places,* could not longer conteyne, but gave some significa- 

* A favourite topic of the writers in favour of Mary of Scotland, is 
the intriguing character of Elizabeth's ambassadors. They conceal at 
the same time the fact that there was scarcely a foreign ambassador 



1562.] THE ENGLISH LAND AT NEWHAVKN. 99 

tion thereof. And because diverse things written by the said 
ambassador were known to be manifest slanders and lies of 
the Queue, the party was contented to have avowed the same 
to th'ambassador. But the matter could not so be used, for 
th'ainbassador being partly told thereof, wold in no wise 
have any recital made, but only required to have his secre- 
tarry being gone from him to return again, who declare 
ing himself to be in fear of his lief, wold not so do, but 
alleging himself to be no born subject of the King's, nor 
otherwise bound to th'ambassador, he departed from hence to 
his own liberty, and at this day (as I hear) rather presses 
th'ambassador with suits to have his wages and certain somes 
of money which th'ambassador owes him, then otherwise 
that he is demanded by th'ambassador to be restored unto 
him. 

The truth is this ambassador is a man very unmete to nor 
each amity betwixt that King and the Queen, for his chief 
travail and labour is to disorder our estate by his popish 
practises, and he seems to neglect all other affairs, and 
rather serves, as may appear, like a Nuncio of the Pope's, 
then the King's ambassador, wherein suerly he is much 
comported withal, in respect of the Queue's good-will to- 
wards that Prince. 

This former part hath remained written these ten days, 
continuing the same until I might write more certainly of the 
landing of our men in Normandy. Until the 26th of Sep- 
tember, whatsoever preparations were made and judgments cast, 
I assure you I could riot have written of any resolution had 
here to send any succours thither, but it was thought that 
shows thereof wold have wrought some inclination. On the 
26th it was concluded, and on the 27th at night like to have 
been utterly revoked, for news came that day from New- 
haven, that the Prince of Condo had expressly forbidden our 

at Elizabeth's court, whose real occupation, and perhaps commission, 
was not to plot against her life and crown. 

H 2 



100 IRELAND. SHANE o'NEIL. [OCT. 

men to land at Ncwhaven by his authoritic.* So yet it 
stoode us upon not to neglect the matter, and by other 
meanes we obteyned a probabilitie to receave us if we wold 
enter. This matter passed hardly, for on the 28th, when our 
men were redy at Portsmouth, no wynde wolde blowe but 
agaynst them untill the 3rd of this moneth, and then as they 
passed with good wind, so no wind wold serve to bring us 
word of their arrivall untill this morning. At Newhaven 
there be two thousand five hundred men, and shal be within 
these ten dayes with my Lord of Warwick five hundred 
more, beside twelve hundred on the seas. 

In Deepe there be of ours but six hundred, and are going 
to be at Rye, the 14th of this moneth, eight hundred more. 

I feare that towne cannot hold .out, but for lack of fortifi- 
cation our men shal be forced to go to Newhaven, or to retire. 
Roanef is not lyke to hold oute the seage, and so I dowbt we 
only in Newhaven must make the accompt to kepe them 
playe, which for strength thereof is lyke so to do. 

Muffettcame hyther on Friday last. I am so fully occupied 
as it is impossible for me to enlarge this my letter, and 
therfore I end. llth Octob. 1562. 

Your assured, 

W. GECILL. 



SHANE MACGUIRE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

After all due reverance, as me due obedyence, I humbly 
recommend me unto your Lordshipp. This is to sertify you 
that Shan O'Nell is com unto me contrey the loth day of this 
present monethe, with a grethe hoste, profryng me all myn 
on^: desyr, and to forsake your Lordshipp is parthys. Buthe 

* It seems to have been at this time a policy of the prince to receive 
the English, without giving them an open authority to enter, in order 
to avoid giving offence to many of his friends in France. 

f Both Dieppe and Rouen were lost. At the siege of this latter 
place the King of Navarre received the wound of which he died. 

Own. $ Parts. But. 



156-2.] SHANE O'NEIL AND HUGH O'DONNELL. U)l 

mine answer was this to him, that I would never forsake you 
thell * you had forsaken me first ; wherefore he bygone to wax 
mad, and to cawsse his men to bran 2 all the corn and houses 
in the este parthe of the river that runnys amydes me coiitrey, 
so that the lefthea another howsse nor no kind of corn in that 
side of the river, butt the sethe it all a fire, and as well he 
did never spar another church another sentory, and moreover 
he has kyllyd abowe three hundred persons of poor laburers 
and women and children, that were makyrig there harvest in that 
side of the river. Butt he could not pas wasteward where 
me cathell 4 was, because I stopped the passage with the 
help of certain hagbutheres that I have. But your Lord 
ship shall understand that after my coming home from the 
English pale,* I was so bold upon your honour as to write to 
Hyw O'Donnell that he should not medell with Shan 
O'Nell is company, another to help against any of the Quyne's 
Maygesty's servants under your Lordship is government, in 
payne of your displeasure. Butt you shall understand that the 
said Hyw O'Donnell has drawn and caused the said 
Shan to goo abutt this river all along thell he came to the 
castle of Bellew, and there Hyw O'Donnell did pas all Shan 
O'Nell is ost in the waist 5 parthys of me country, and the 
said Hyw himself with all his power is campyd with the 
said Shan O'Nell, and this T may thell 6 you that I am clen 
banyssyd, and all because of Hyw O'Donnell is help. For I 
told you dyvers times that Shan O'Nell should never have 
the power to banysse me, excepthe it had ben through Hyw 
O'Donnell is castles, that standys in the bordywrs of me 
country. Wherefore I shall desire your Lordship to sy 7 to me 
grethe lostys, the which is innoumerabell to be rekyned. For 
I promise you, and you doo not sy the rather to Shan O'Nell 
is bcsynes, ye are like to make him the strongest man of 

1 Till. 2 Burn. 3 They left. * Cattle. 

* Since the last letter he seems to have been to consult the Earl of 
Sussex personally^ 

s West. 6 Tell. 7 See. 



102 AFFAIRS OF NORMANDY. [OCT. 

all Erlond, for evry man wyll take an exampell by me grethe 
lostys. Wherefor take hyd to yourselfes by thymes, 8 for he 
is lyke with the helpe of Hyw CTDonnell to have all the 
power from this place thell he come to the wallys of Gall- 
way, to rysse against you. 

Bechetching your onor to causse a horsse that was taken 
from this berer to be restoryd agayne, for I dyd sende the 
sayde horsse to by me selfe a churthe 9 of mayll, and the l of 
the Nafen (?) has taken the sayd horsse from him. Desyring 
you to give credence to this berer in all things, thus far ye 
well to the plesur of God, and to your nobell hart's desyr. 
Wryten in Farmanah, the 20th day of October praying you 
to send me word if ever I shall have any sowcor agaynste 
Shan O'Nell. 

Be yours to command, 
SHAN MAGUYR. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, sence the pacquett and the carrier were redy to depart, 
I hard from Newhaven that it is trew that the Prynce of Conde 
is sorted out of Orleance, and joyned with the Almaynes, 
and it is dow r ted whether they w T ill to Pariss, or come to 
Normandy. If he come towards Normandy, he shall have, I 
thynk, redy to joyne with him some convenient nomber of 
our men. You maye advertise the Prince of Conde that 
the money promised to him shall be ready at Newhaven within 
these ten days.* 

The French ambassador shall have his answer on Mon- 
daye, which shall tend to continue in our former purpose to 
mayntain our doings for help of the King's subjects, and 
to prevent our own dangers by the Guises. The matter 

8 Betimes. - Shirt. 10 They. 

* This last paragraph is in cypher. 



100-2.] CONSPIRACY OF THE FOOLKS. 103 

of the Pools* here shall not be meddled withal until the 
Parliament. 

Put into your cipher in the lyne of d for days D, and in 
writing of the cifre, write no more than is needful. I here 
that Killigrew shall be redeemed for young Pegrillion, and 
that Layghton is prisoner, and that our Englishmen are 
putt to the galleys. You may tax that cruelty, and move 
them not to provoke us to follow their cruelty. 

I never thought so long to here from ambassadors. For 
God's sake hereafter devise some shifts to let us know some- 
what, though you send by Flanders by some merchant. 
But herin I ask your pardon, for I am assured your lot is 
over great, and so I take my leave. Monsieur de Forts and 
Rybault be come, and I here that the Cont Montgomery is 
coming hither with Sir Henry Sydney .f 13th of November, 
1562. 

Yours most assured, 

W. CECIL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 
Sir, as I did suddenly upon Francisco's departure, thank 

* "Arthur Poole and his brother, great grandchildren to George, Duke 
of Clarence, brother to King Edward the Fourth, Antony Fortescue, 
who had married their sister, and others, were arraigned, for that they 
had conspired to withdraw themselves into France to the Duke of the 
Guise, and from thence to return with an army into Wales, and to pro 
claim the Queen of Scots Queen of England, and Arthur Pool Duke 
of Clarence. All which they ingenuously confessed at the bar, protest- 
ing, notwithstanding, that they meant not to enterprise these things 
while Queen Elizabeth lived, who they believed would dye ere the 
year came about, being induced so to think by the unlawful arts of 
conjuring wizards. Whereupon they were condemned to dye : never 
thelesse, their lives were spared for reverence of the blood royal." 
Camden. 

t Sir Henry Sidney had been sent into France to negotiate on the 
affairs of the Protestants. 



104 RELATIONS WITH FRANCE [NOV. 

you for your many letters, so now agayne I liartcly thank 
you at more lesure. 

My Lords of the counsell have herd your letters to them, 
and thereupon consequently have also understand all the 
rest of your negotiations with the Kyng and Quene there, 
and with the Cardinall of Ferrary, the Pope's legate. 

I fynd them all to allow of your zeale to procure peace, and 
of your diligence in so ample a manner, as by your wrytings 
doth appeare. 

But to wryte plainely and franckly to you, as I wold 
you shuld if our places were changed ; the most here have 
mislyked that you have treated with the legate, and seme 
willyng that you shuld have been reprehended therfor. But 
therin I and others that understand your good meaning, have 
so tempred the cause, as therof you shall here no otherwise 
except it be by me, and some other your private good friends. 
Here be amongst us divers very scrupulous of dealing with 
the Pope's ministers ; and therfore I wish you to forbeare the 
Cardynall in these affayres, and use other curtesy to him as 
you see cause for his estate of Ferrar, as yourselfe did well 
make the distinction to himself. I must also praye you to 
take hede of Monsr. de Sevre, for he is very fine and nimble in 
all his practices. The Erie of Mountgomery is here : his 
coming is to sollicite the Quene to send more men into Nor- 
mandy to joyne with the Prince of Conde, who he sayth 
certainly cometh into Normandy.* 

It is hard in these things to gyve good advise without cer- 
ten knowledg how thyngs are like to pass there. If the 
Kyng of Navarr be deade, it is lykely some change shuld 
follow. 

I doo sende you herwith in cifre a letter from the Quene 
to the Prince of Conde, which I pray you cause to be sent 
as soone as ye maye, and I have taken order to send one 

* This paragraph is in cipher in the original, but deciphered. 



J562.] DEATH OF THE EARL OF HTJNTLEY. 105 

other by an other way. The contents are to assure him that 
she will make no accord withowt him.* The Queue's Ma- 
jesty hath willed me to thank you for your letter to her, which 
contameth good counsel. But she willed me also to warn 
you of the Cardinal of Ferrar, and to let all the favourers of 
the Prince manifestly understand, that without his consent 
you wold not enter into any treaty. 

I thynk the Queue's Majesty will forthwith send over more 
power, but how many I know not. 

Concerning Newhaven, we understand the strength thereof 
very well, from whence came on Satyrday last Sir Richard 
Lee, and we mean very shortly to send Mr. Portynary. Our 
men doo daily fortify and perfect the works there, and they 
shall have to that end very shortly a number of minors out of 
Cornwall. 

That I lately wrote of the Erie of Huntley's f sodden 
death is true, and by confession of his sons, it appears 
that he intended high treason to the Queen. Scotland is 
happily delivered of the worst canker that it had. 

I doo herwith send to you the copy of the answer 
made to the French ambassador which he shall have to- 
morrow, but he shall not have our wry ting. I have spoken 
to my Lord of Bedford, for your request to have of his Italyoii 
some little fyrkyn of salutations, but he smyleththerat,knowing 
your sufficiency. 

I have sent your letter to my Lord of Warwyk, which cost 
me the thrugh heating of my hand. I have also advised him 
how to use your letters. I wish some good means were used 
for intelligence betwixt you and his Lordship, now that 
Mr. Sydney is come from thence. Sir Hugh Paulett is ap- 
pointed to resyde with my Lord of Warwyk. We are bold 

* The foregoing is also in cipher. 

t During this year, there had been discovered more than one plot 
against the Queen of Scots, by the Earls of Bothwell, Huntlcy, &c. 
Both well took refuge in England. 



106 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [NOV. 

with all shipps that come into our ports, to cause them sell 
their grayne, wherof a gretenomber hath happened within these 
twenty dayes, by meanes of the south-west wynds. In Devon- 
shire hath arryved twenty great hulcks laden with rye and 
wheate ; in Portsmouth fowre, in Rye twoo, which be sent 
to Newhaven. And so I end. From myhowse* overageynst 
the Savoy. 17th Novemb. 1562. 

Your assured loving frend, 

W. CECILL. 





RANDOLPH TO LORD ROBERT DUDLEY. 

My humble deutie consydered. Since my laste letters unto 
your Honour, there hathe occurred here no great matter of im- 
portance, which hathe cawsed me the longer to staye my 
wryting. 

Immediatelye after the defeate of the Erie of Huntlie, and 
execution done upon his sone John Gordon, and certayne 
other offenders to the number onlye of six persons, the Queue's 
Grace departethe from Abberdyne towards Edenbourge, 
havinge lefte suche order in the north partes as she thoughte 
moste neadefull. At her beinge at Downotarre,t a castle of 
the Earle Marshall's, thyther comethe unto her Villemonte. 
Manye surmyses ther were what shold be the cause of his 
cominge. Suche as knewe hym beste coulde easy lie conjecture 
that he came for little good. His whole arrant was to little 
effecte. He brought with hym fewe letters, and not one of 
great importance more then that the Quene mother dyd gre- 
viouslye complayne unto this Quene, of the Quene's Majestic 
my soveraigne, that she had possessed certayne of her 
sone's towns, and geven ayde unto his subjectes agaynst 
hym, which she thought wolde be a cawse of some greater 

* Cecil House, in the Strand. 

t Dunnottar, fourteen miles from Aberdeen. The castle, on a lofty 
rock in the sea, is now said to be the most majestic ruin in Scotland. 



SCOTLAND AND FRANCE. 107 

discorde betwene the realme of France and England then 
coulde sone be appeased. Where it was dowted that he had 
some privie commission from the Quene's uncles unto her, 
to cause her myslyke my mestres' doyngs, and that she sholde 
seme so farre to favour ther enterprises, that she wolde 
evil allowe whatsoever was done agaynst them, the truthe 
hereof hathe byne so farre searchyd that it is for certayne 
knowne, that he had no suche charge, and came rather to 
seeke some commoditie ether by service or other ways, then 
that he was sent by anye man. Of this I am assured, and 
therfore do the boldelyer wryte it. Marrie, he is a man that 
sayleth with all wyndes, and fashioneth himselfe to all men's 
fantasies that he hathe to do with. He speaketh to the 
Quene whatsoever she lykethe beste, and of my mestres' 
doyngs to her he speaketh dyspytefullye inoughe. I see here 
his credit little, either with her Grace's selfe or anye other. 
I have ofte tawlked with hym, but more accompte I 
thynke not to make of hym then I fynde cawse worthye. 
At Mounte Rosse * ther comethe one other, a servante of 
Mons. d'Amville's ; of hym ther is no lesse thoughte then 
of the former. We looked then for none other than open 
warre, whereof the brute ran so faste before, that the 
Quene herself founde great fawlte therat. He arriveth 
abowte one hower before the Quene's supper. He pre- 
sented unto her, in the syght of as maynie as wer in the 
chamber, onlye one letter from his master, and moe than 
that he had not unto her. It contained three whole sheetes 
of paper. I was present at the deliverie, and sawe her 
Grace reade it greatlye, as it appeared, to her contentment. 
He reporteth the whole state of thinges in France, as well of 
the Prince and his power as the Guisians, with all the sup- 
portes, I thynke, as trewlye as he coulde. Dyversand longe 
tawlke hath byne betweene the Quene and hym. The pur- 
pose is more secrete than is yet knowen unto anye, excepte 

* Montrosc. 



108 ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND. [NOV. 

it be unto the Lord of Lidingeton, who though ether he will 
not, or yet cannot assure me what his arrant is, yet dothe he 
put me owte of dowte that it nether concerneth my mestres 
nor anye thinge that can be prejudiciall unto her. I thoughte 
it better for a tyme to contente myselfe with this, then over 
ernestlye to presse hym for further knowlege then he was will- 
inge to imparte unto me, thoughe I will not so leave but 
rather lette tyme worke it. This advantage I have gotten by 
the hastie arrivall of these two gentlemen, and by the sus- 
pition that is growne of their comynge, which gave all men 
occasion to thinke that theie came for lyttle good, that I per- 
ceave that if this Quene were bothe of wyll and power to 
annoy e my mestres, that she sholde wante bothe counsellers 
thereunto and mynisters to be imployed therm, excepte such 
as dwell upon the borders, whoe what kynde of men thcie arc 
your honor knowethe righte well. Excepte that I had some- 
what to perswade me thus to wryte, it were too great bolde- 
nes of me so to assure your Lordship. Touchinge the good- 
will that is borne unto the Queue's Majestic my sovereigne, 
in the Quene herself I fynde it nothynge dyminished of that, 
that at anye tyme I have before wrytten. And in her subjects 
(I mean onlye the godly e), I fynde it so increased (in speciall 
since the supporte sent into France), that I thynke her Ma- 
jestie the happiest woman alyve. Her Majestie's sickenes 
hathe byne hevily lamented, and God nowe as greatlye 
praysed for her recoverye, whom he for his mercie's sake so 
preserve, that his glorie in her actes maye alwayes be knowne 
unto the worlde ! 

At Dundie ther comethe unto the Quene the Duke to de- 
mand pardon for his sone in lawe the Lord Gordon, whom 
he hymself stayed by Ihe Queue's commandement. He hathe 
receaved hytherto lyttle comforte, nor shall not knowe what 
shall become of hym before the Parliment, which wil be 
aboute Candlemas. 

At Dundie I tooke my leave of her Grace to be before her 
in Edenbourge, where she piirposeth to be within eight 



156-2.] A NEW LOAN. 1()J) 

daycs, taking her journey by Sterlinge. I here that James 
Gray is arrived. He went the next l way to meet the 
Queue, and so I did miss him. This Queen at this present 
writes to my Sovereign, as also the Lord of Lidingetoii 
unto your honour. My Lord of Murray willed me to 
present his hearty commendations unto your Lordship. He 
desired God to send your Lordship to the increase of ho- 
nor that lately c you have worthily received, such advance 
meant as may be most unto your hart's desire. Most hum- 
blye I tayke my leave; at Edenbourge, the 18th of November, 
1562. Your honourable Lordship's at command, 

THOMAS RANDOLPHS. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, This morning your servant Barlow departed from 
hence, and to give occasion for the French ambassador's 
servant to come to you, I required him to carry this simple 
letter. This day he had been satisfied by my Lord Ad- 
myrall, Mr. Petre, and Mr. Mason to all his complaints. The 
gretcst odd that is unanswered, is this, that the French of 
Newhaven send over much wares hy there, and sell the same as 
there owen, which I dowt may belong to Parysiens, &c. 

We are about borrowing a sum of money like to Queen 
Maria's first lone, which shall be repayd we trust with 
the subsidy which the Parliament I trust shall give. The 
sheriff in your shire is Mr. Bavcntyne.* 19th November. 
1562. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 

1 Nearest. 

* In Fuller's lists there is no sheriff of this name in any shire, at this 
period. 



110 IRELAND TURBULENCE OF o'NEIL. [NOV. 

SHANE MACGUIRE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX.* 

In me moste harthy 1 maner I humbly recommende me 
unto your Lordshipp. This is to sertyfy your onor, that the 
laste jurney that Shan O'Nell made into this con trey with 
the helpe of Hyw O'Donnell, that the lefethe 2 nother house, 
nother corne in all me contrey upon the mayne lande 
onwastyd, nother churche, nother sentory onrobyd, butt ther 
is sertayne ylonds in me contrey in the whiche ilonds standys 
all me goods. Butt your Lordshipp shall understand that Hyw 
O'Donnell has prepared and provyded twelve bottes 3 for to 
robe and waste all thes ylonds, and Shan O'Nell is coming 
be land with all his power, so that I cannot skape nother 
be water nor be land, excepthe God and your Lordshippe dco 
helpe me at this nyd, 4 for I doo promes to God and to your 
onor that all me contrey are agaynst me, becausse of 
ther grete lostys and for ferde of this nexthe jurney that 
Shan O'Nell and Hyw O'Donnell are wylyng to come, for all 
me men is pleasur is that I shuld yelde meself unto Shan 
O'Nell, for the safe gard of themselfes and of ther goods. 
Wherfor I doo bechetche your Lordshippe to sethe some 
remedy in this mattheres, for ferde of me banyshment, and for 
ferde of dyvers others cawssys, that is to saye, and if the sayd 
Shan shuld take the possession of me countrey once into his 
own hands, I doo promes you that he would give ynough to doo 
to all the Quynys is subjectes to sethe hym owte of this 
contrey, and furthermore all the Northe of Irlond will holde 
with hym for ferde to be handylyd as I am. Taking your 
Lordshipp is counsall as Lieutenant and ruler under the 
Quyny's Maygestyin this realme of Irlond, bechetching 5 you 
to wrytte me no more letters in Latyn, becausse that I wold 
not that nother clerke nor non other man of this contrey 

* The superscription to this letter is " Unto his Ryghtt onorabell 
Lord the Erlle of Sussex and the Quyne's Maygsty is Leutenantt of 
this reame of Irlond this byll be delyveryd with reverance and spid." 

1 Hearty. 2 They left. 3 Boats. * Need. 5 Beseeching. 



1562.] SHANE O'N-KIL AND MACGUIRF. Ill 

should know your mind, wherefore doo you write all your 
mind in English. Your Lordship shall understand that 
I hard sey that your onor did give twenty-four marks ster- 
ling for the horse that you did send me, wherefore I would be 
sorry that you should cast away your money so, for I thought 
to send the horse bake again if it had not ben for ferde to 
displease your onor. And furthermore after that your Lord 
ship did command some of your servants to send me 
four hand gowns, 5 I promise you that I had lever in a manner 
that the hadkypyth the said goons with themselves. Butt I 
doo thank your Lordship for your good will,* desiring 
your onor to sethe no blame to your messenger for his lange 
taryment, for it was I that stayed him to the inthenthe 
that he should know all the news of this country, desiring 
you to give him creditt in all things. Moreover, I pray 
you to be good unto Make Owelyn as to me good friend, for 
I promise you that Shan O'Nell hathys 6 him above all men, 
as this berer may thel. Thus fare ye well to the pleasure of 
God and to your nobel harthis desire. 

Written in Magwyr is Castle, the 25th day of November, 
in the yer of our Lord God 1562. 

Be your daily orator and pore bedman, 

SHAN MAGWYR. 

Desiring your Lordship to send me non other man with 

* This passage affords " a curious and admirable specimen," as col- 
lectors say, " of the feeling which has ever existed towards English 
government in Ireland, or rather of the misunderstanding which exists 
even to the present moment, caused by the dishonest agency of the 
characters which Miss Edgeworth has so graphically placed before 
the public as f middle men.' Macguire, by his letter of the 15th of 
August, appears doubtful as to the delivery of the goshawk, a value 
able present by him to the Lord Deputy, and which he seems to think 
had been appropriated by the middle man. And now the horse pre- 
scented to this chief by the Lord Deputy, as well as the hand guns, is 
probably changed by the middle man for one of little or no value. 

5 Hand guns. 6 Hates. 



112 THE REBELS THREATEN DUNDALK. [NOV. 

your busynes but this present bercr, for he is a man that I 
dare trust into any secrethe that I have. 



THE BAILIFFS OF DUNDALK TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Our humble duetie premised unto your honourable and dis- 
cret wisdoms. It may please the same to be advertised that 
this instant, Saint Andrewes day, McMahown do campe 
uppon the borders of the Fwys.* Also ther is a grete host 
camping in severall places towards the circuyt of Maghir- 
connyll and this towne, intending (as we suppose) to invade 
us or the Englishe pale. Therefore it is necessary that the bor- 
ders thereof be defend with horsemen ; and that the town 
here be defended with fotemen. Beseching your wisdoms to 
send us thre score gunners, whereof six of them to be skil- 
full in shoting of great ordinances, and to take order that 
they may be victualled uppon the Quene's store, as Mr. Aud- 
ley is band and Mr. Delvys is band was, when they lay here 
a twelvemoneth of the last Michaelmas, viz. in the last warre, 
for assuredlie the pore town is not able to beare them other- 
wise. And Mr. Myght to be commanded to make this pro- 
vision out of hand, and to send the same by sea with all ex- 
pedition, and the gunners to be sent to us forthwith, for this 
man is bent uppon malice, and to excuse himselfe by dissem- 
bling, (as far as we can understand), that it is nat he that do 
it, for he said to Sir John Bellewe f is messenger, that what- 
soever is done is Godd's myracle, alledging that McMahoun, 

* The Fews is a ridge of mountains which run across the county of 
Armagh. 

t Of Bellewstown, and brother-in-law of Thomas, second Lord 
Louth, with whom and others he was joined in commission on the 13th 
of April, 1563, to be Justices and Commissioners for the preservation 
of the peace and good government of Drogheda and the county of 
Louth, during the absence of the Lord Deputy Sussex in his expe- 
dition against Shane O'Neil. 



1562.] THE INFLUENZA IN 1562. 113 

M'Genes, and O'Hanlon are the Queue's friends, and that 
he has not the rule of them, and if he had he wold correct 
them, and so what hurt is done are done by her own and 
not by him, where of truth our prey, and Sir John Belleweis 
prey are in his own country, and made by his own men. 

Further we beseech your Honour to grant us a warrant 
that we may have a barrel of superfyne powder out of Car- 
lingford, twenty bows, and twenty shevys of arrows, togidder 
with a score of piks. It is no marvel that he make war so 
long as he is victualled by boat from Drogheda and Carling- 
ford. 

And thus we humbly take leve. From Dundalk,* this last 
of November, 1562. 

Your humbles, 

STEPHEN CASHELL, Bailiff. 

JAMES DYLLON, Bailiff. 

JAMES BRANDON. 

JOHN CHASHELL. 

ROBERT DOWDALL. 

PATRYK STANLEY. 



RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

May yt please your Honour, immediately upon the Quene's 
arrival here, she fell acquainted with a new disease, that is 
common in this town, called here the new acquaintance, 
which passed also through her whole court, nether sparing 
lord, lady, nor damoiselle, not so much as ether French or 
English. It is a payne in their heads that have yt, and a 
soreness in their stomachs, with a great cough, that remain 
ethe with some longer with other shorter time, as yt finds 
apt bodies for the nature of the disease.t 

* When Shane O'Neil afterwards attacked Dundalk, the town 
made a gallant defence, and he was driven away with disgrace. 

t This disease resembles strikingly the complaint of late so well 
known under the name of the influenza. 

VOL. I. I 



114 LOSS OF ROAN. [NOV. 

The Queue kepte her bedde six dayes. Ther was no 
appearance of danger, nor manie that die of the disease, 
excepte some olde folkes. My Lorde of Murray e is now 
presentlye in it, the Lorde of Lidingeton hathehad it, and 1 
am ashamed to say that I have byne free of it, seinge it seketh 
acquayntance at all men's handes. By reasons of these oc- 
casions I have not scene her grace since she came to towne. 
I was the unwillinger also to resorte to the courte untyll the 
common brute of the takynge of Roan* was paste, where 
I shoulde either have harde that that wold have greved me, 
or perchance spoken that that sholde have greved other, for 
that I see nether measure in their joye, nor moderation in 
their doings, when anything (be it never so lyttle) come to 
their knowledge to be as theie desyer it. Hytherto theie 
knowe nothinge for certayne but that which I have reported 
by suche advertisement as I had from my Lord President of 
Yorke, and that in suche sorte that no we theie begyne to 
dowte what Honor was had of that victorie, or what great 
cause theie have to rejoice. Ther came nether shippe nor 
man by lande owte of France since Chatellet came to the 
courte.f 

Theie have as lyttle intelligence here as the coste is that 
theie bestowe to have it. Yet notwithstanding their neigh- 
bours of Barwicke wyll not spare to lette them knowe what 
theie here. 

The Duke came unto thys towne upon Thursdaye laste. 
He brought with hym the Lord Gordon. By commandement of 
the Quene, upon Saturdaye he was committed unto the 
castle. Upon Sondaye at night the Duke supped with Mr. 
Knox, wher the Duke desyred that I shold be. Thre speciall 
pointes he hathe promised to perform to Mr. Knox before 

* Rouen, taken by the Duke of Guise from the Protestants and 
their English allies. 

t Chastellet, the servant of M. d'Anville, who the year following 
was encouraged by the familiarity in which the Queen of Scots indulged 
him to make an attempt upon her honour, and was executed. 



15(>2.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 115 

me : the one is never to go for any respect from that that he 
has promised to be, a professor of Christ's word, and setter 
forth of the same to his power : the next, always to 
show himself an obedient subject to his sovereign, as 
far as in duty and conscience he is bound : the third, 
never to alter from that promise he has made for the 
maintenance of peace and amity between both the 
realms. 

I had of him besides this, nlanie good words myself 
touching this latter point. 

I will believe them all as I see them take effect, but 
trust that it shall never lye in his word alone. Before the 
parliament be appointed, there shall be a convention at new 
yore's tide. 

We are desirous to hear farther of the success of things 
in France before we summon our parliament, lest that we tyne 
our silly poor mass against our wills. 

There has been here some good report made unto the 
Queen of the valiantness of certain of her subjects in 
the defence of Roan, little I thynk to her Grace's content 
meant, but spoken by him that yet never word out of his 
mouth came to her amiss, the Erie of Glencare, so that 
it was forced to be passed over in merriness, whatsoever she 
thinks. But if need were of any such men, in spa 
ciall of light horsemen, I believe there would yet an honest 
company be found that would be glade to receive enter- 
taynment, and wold do well their parts. 

I write it not unto your Honour, but that I think there are 
of my own country that can do as well as theie, but by- 
cause I know slivers here well wy Hinge, and wish that 
there should always be some in the eye of the papists, that 
theie should not over well conceive of the whole country. 
I leave farther for this present to trouble your honour, most 
humbly taking my leave. At Edenbourge, the last of No 
vember, 1562. 

May it please your Honour, Davis is arrived at the writing 

i 2 



ll(j CIVIL COMMOTIONS IN FRANCE. 

hereof; it will be two days before he receive his answer, and 
more I think cannot be said then is already written. 

Your Honor's always to command, 

THOSE. RANDOLPHE. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, although my leisure be small, that I am constrained 
not only to write to you the Queue's Majestie's letters, but 
also to all other parts, yet I will not leave to thank you for 
your private letters, praying you so to continue. That which 
my Lords here do find lack in, is that you keep not a con- 
tynuation in the order of your news ; as by your letters of 
the 29th of November, it appeared that the prince lay in sege 
at Corbell, and by those of the seventh of this month it 
appears that he was ne'er Pariss : but how he left Corbell 
is not written. And we here have reports that Monsieur 
D'Aubmale was taken prisoner, but being not written 
by you I do not believe it. 

Beside this, you write that D'Andelott should be still sick 
at Orleans, and Mr. Throkmorton writes that he was one of 
them with whom the treaty was had at Pariss. I marvel 
also that Mr. Throkmorton did not certify you what articles 
or conditions he offered to the prince. 

You write of three thousand Spaniards newly arrived at 
Pariss ; but from whence they cam appears not. So as you see 
how in plain manner I write to you, praying you to inter- 
prete me to the best ; for though I thus write to yourself, yet I 
doo not leave you unexcused here. By the letters which Kille- 
grew's man brought 1 trust you are plainly instructed what 
to doo, and at this present I send unto you a copy of a letter 
from my Lord of Warwyk, by which ye shall understand 
of an accident there happened. Thereof you may also inform 
Mr. Throkmorton. I thynk best that Mr. Throkmorton huld 
make no haste from the prince. 



1562.] EMBARGO LAID ON FRENCH SIHPS. 117 

We are fully bent to keep Newhaven, by God's grace, against 
all France. 

Sir Hugh Paulett* is gone to Newhaven only to assist my 
Lord of Warwyk. We have sent three old bands from Barwyk to 
come to Newhaven. We have there six thousand soldiers and 
three months victuals, and so will continue the victualling. 

The whole peril is in that the number of the Frenchmen are 
there so many, which we cannot get thence without great 
unkindness. But if the prince there shall sever from us, we 
must be bold to put them out. 

Herewith I send you letters to be conveyed to the prince 
from Monsieur La Hay here, where unto it is required that 
you will procure them some answer, and so for this time I 
end. 14th December, 1562. 

Your assured to command, 

W. CECIL. 

Three ships of Feckham, laden with wyiies from Bur- 
deaux, set upon a little ship of the Queue's, called the Hare, 
passing from Portsmouth to Newhaven, but the Hare took one 
of the dogs, with a hundred tun of wine.f 

The French ambassador may perchance complain that 
his curriors are stayed at Dover, which grows upon 
this. Of late he complained that they were evil used upon 
the way thitherward. And we for remedy devised that when 
soever he wold send any, he should have either my letter, or 
Sir John Mason's. $ And now he is not so contented, but 

* According to Stowe, Sir Hugh Pawlett, in company with the 
Comte Montgomery, arrived at Newhaven on the 17th December. 

t On the 25th of November, says Stowe, "the Queene's ship called 
the Hare, coming from Portsmouth, arrived at Newhaven, and in her 
came Sir John Portinarie, a man of great experience in fortification ; 
they were by the way assailed by a French ship of ninety tuns and 
better, but they that were aboard the Hare vanquished the enemies, 
took the same ship, and brought her with them, being laden with 
wines " 

J Sir John Maston was born at Abingdon, in Berkshire, had been a 
distinguished courtier in the reigns of Henry VIII. and Edward VI., 



118 BATTLE OF DREUX. [DEC. 

wold send without our knowledg, which we care not to re- 
lent, so your passengers might be as curtously used, and pass 
without passport. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, this brynger Mr. Somer must be and make my excuse 
at this tyme. I am much perplexed, because I know not 
what to thynk of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, whether he 
was with you there the daye of the battell* or with them. 
I trust he was come to you, for we here nothyng of him 
otherwise. Our intelligence is not certen, but over certeyn 
we think it to be that the prynce is taken, so as the heade 
and staye of that faction remayneth dismembered from the 
body. And except Almighty God shewe his arme and power, 
this webb is undone, and new to beginne. We here ar 
resolutely determyned to kepe Newhaven, except they there 
will resolve to restore us Calliss. 

I pray you to advertise us how you here of the particulari- 
tyes of this battell, that I may compare the same with ours. 
25 December, 1562. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, we are here much troubled with varietie of tales. 
From Flanders they wry te on the llth of this month that 

and was treasurer of the household to Queen Elizabeth, and Chancellor 
of the University of Oxford. He died, according to Fuller, in 1566. 
Camden calls him vir gravis atque eruditus. 

* Of Dreux, where the Protestants were defeated, and the Prince 
of Conde taken prisoner. 



1562.] TAKIMJ OF TANKKRV1LLK. 110 

an accord is mack'. Some others that the Prince of Condos is 
in the Bastillion in Parris, and nothing certain. 

The reports of any of our men lost at Harflew or Tanker- 
vile is fable. At Harflew the Rhyngrave lost fourscore of 
his horsemen, at which tyrne Monsier de Beauvoise was hurt, 
and three of ours hurt with casualty of fire. 

Tankerfeld was taken by Frenchmen, and to aid them to 
keep it three hundred English were sent thither, not with in- 
tent to keep it against an army, or the cannon, but with 
purpose to depart by water upon any such preparation. 
The keeping of it hath served well for provision of corn 
and wood ; and on Saturday last my Lord of Warwyk sent 
for the Englishmen, because he herd that the Rhyngrave and 
Vilebone had determined to cany the cannon to it ; but the 
Frenchmen being but forty wold not come away, and 
Captain Sawle of his own corradg wold needs tarry there 
with fifty of his. But I thynk my Lord of Warwyk will 
not let him tarry the danger.* 

* Stowe gives the following account of the taking of Tankerville and 
Harfleur. " The same day at night (8th Dec.) the Double Rose with 
other boats passed out of the haven, (Newhaven,) Edward Dudley 
and Captain John Ward being aboard, with other to the number of 
an hundred good soldiers, sailing down the river, landed besides 
Tankerville, and lay close all that night in a wood. In the morning 
Monsieur Bimarre, ensigne-bearer to the county Montgomery, with 
six or seven Frenchmen unarmed, went to the castle gate, and there 
fell in talk with Monsieur Dimence, that was captain of that for- 
tress, having about him ten soldiers. Whilst they were thus in 
talk, the Englishmen and Frenchmen coming forth of the wood that 
was there at hand, reared up their ladders at the breach which was 
made the summer before, and entering by the same, came down into the 
base court. Which thing, when the French soldiers that kept talk 
at the castle gate perceived, the captain beholding as good as three 
score armed men within the castle at his back, he suddenly yielded 
himself, and in this sort was the castle taken, and the captain brought 
prisoner to Newhaven. The 12th of December, the Earl of Warwike, 
Monsieur de Beauvoys, and Monsieur de Bricquemault, with all the 
horsemen, and three thousand footmen, passed forth of Newhaven unto 



120 AFFAIRS IN NORMANDY. [JAN. 

Captayn Horsey is gone to Depe, and Captain Blunt. 
The Comte Montgomery is a fast man in this cause, and 
being ayded will surely kepe Depe. 

I thynk ye shall shortly here of an army provided here to be 
used, if your ambassador can doo no good. I pray you if Mr. 
Somer be still there, praye hym to buy me some such litle 
French bookes as he knoweth ; I fantasye of cosmography or 
genealogies. 

God send us good tydyngs from you. 14th Jan. 1562. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. CECILL. 

I pray you make Sir Nich. Throkmorton privie to this 
letter. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, as I wrote yesternight by the French ambassador's ser- 
vant that I wold with spede depeche thisberer your servant, so 
I doo, although I wold he might have tarryd untill the pro- 
vost of Paris had bene exarnyned. But seeing this ambassador 
maketh hast to inform the French Kyng of the fact, we 
thought it necessary for you to understand also so much as 
is doone. I send you the full informations of the matter be- 
twixt the Spanish ambassador and the counsell, and abreeff of 
the materiall poynts of the murderer's confession. All thyngs 

Harflew, out of which towne issued seven hundred reisters of the re- 
tinue of county Reingrave, and three hundred footmen, who fell in 
skirmish with the French and English very hotly, but the English 
drave them to the gates of Harflew, and slue them there, and 
upon the wals of the towne ; yet was there not slaine past seven of the 
English part." 

The castle of Tankerville was retaken on the 16th Jan., after a siege 
of eight days, with two thousand men. 

Montgomery left Newhaven for Dieppe with four hundred harque- 
busiers, on the 26th Dec. 



1563.] ELIZABETH'S SECOND PARLIAMENT. 121 

here in the realm are quiet, thanked be God ! The parliament* 
is begun, and I trust shall be short, for the matters of moment 
like to pass are not many : reviving of some old laws for pe- 
nalties of some felonies, and the grant of a subsidy. I thynk 
somewhat will be attempted to ascertain the realm of a sue - 
cessor to this crown, but I fear the unwillingness of her 
Majestic to have such a person known, will stay the matter.f 

The Pools and Fortescugh shall be arraigned this term. 

A gentleman is arrived at Rye, sent from the Admiral 
Chastillion, who assures his purpose to prosecute the 
cause of God and of his country, and means to join with 
our power in Normandy, which I trust shall make a spedy 
end of the whole. Indeed, although this be the best, yet I 
think our deeds shall prove but brags, wherefore you must 
also use the same course, to let them understand that if ac- 
cord and peace will not grow by treaty and reasonable speech, 
which hitherto the Quene's Majestic hath used, her Majestic 
must and will seek her own by further means, that shall more 
miscontent them than anything yet enterprised. 

I doo send you presently! the copy of the treaty betwixt 
the Emperor Charles and King Henry the VIII ; the other 
was also extracted in braves, but I perceive you are satisfied 
therewith by Sir Nich. Throgmorton, and so I end. 

From Westminster, the 14th of January, 1562. 
Yours assuredly, 

W. CECIL. 

Send me a note of the crimes and proper names, with their 
additions, of the two Englishmen for whose pardon ye 
write, so as I may cause their pardons to be made. 

* Elizabeth's second parliament, which began to sit on the 12th of 
January, 1562-3, and was opened by the Queen in person, with great 
ceremony. 

f In effect, it was in this parliament, very early after its opening, 
that the Commons petitioned so urgently for the marriage of the 
Queen, or the limitation of the succession, to which the Queen an- 
answered evasively and somewhat rebukingly. 
i. e. now. 



THE PROVOST OF PARIS IMPRISONED. ' [FEB. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, ye shall understand by Mr. Midlemore our estate 
here. We depend upon the proceedyngs of the two armyes, 
being so nere Orleance. Flying tales be brought hyther from 
Depe of battells or fights, but I doo hardely beleeve those 
reports. Mr. Mydlemore hath abydden here somewhat the 
longer, for that we perceyved that the French ambassador had 
receaved letters, and we thought mete to see the issew therof, 
which proved to nothyng but a demand of the provost of 
Pariss to be delyvered. Whereunto the Queue's Majestie 
meaneth to make such an answer as you may perceyve by a 
copy of the letter now sent, and within two dayes before 
Mr. Mydlemore's coming, the provost was committed to the 
Tower, where he is lodged over well, in the Queue's Majes- 
tie's owne lodgyng, beyng committed thyther because he used 
such practises wher he was, as by four or five letters inter- 
cepted betwixt hym and others doth appere, and by those 
letters he avowed that he wold not answ r er, but wold delaye 
the matter so 7 as nothynge shuld be gotten at his hand. And 
by his owne letters it is clerly to be gathered that he is gilty, 
which letters were partly wrytten with onions, and conveyed 
to and fro in stoppells of bottells, and some in his coddpieces 
of his hooss sent out to mendyng ; but he is ignorant therof, 
that we have his letters. 

Capt. de Hayss, the trafBcquer for d'Anville, is returned, and 
pretendeth that d'Anville intendeth to come hyther with con- 
ditions for peace, but I guess his comming hyther is but for a 
passadg into Scotland, where they saye his hart is. We are 
ware ynough of theire practises ; if they meane well, we will 
joyne with them : otherwise they shall have words for words. 

For your request to have your dietts payd by Sir 
Thomas Gresham, so it is in trowth that he hath not a penny 
of the Queue's in his hands, nor hath commission to take upp 
any, but hath due to hym more then we be redy to paye. 1 



1,563.] KARL HOTHWKLL TAKEN. 123 

have moved her Majesty as you required to augment your 
diets with the odd fraction to make up even crowns, but I 
cannot presently attain it. 

Her Majesty hears not easily any increase of chardg: 
and yet as I see any opportunity I will renew it. The pardons 
for three Englishmen which you desire, are in writing, but I 
dout how that of Molyneux shall be obtained, and indeed 
I cannot favour it, for he is one of the notablest theves in 
England, and hath been sought for with great expeditions. 
The other two I trust you may promise. 

Mr. Micldlemore's coming is of weight, and therefore I pray 
you way it thereafter, and devise some ways to send him 
to place of service, which you there can better devise then we 
here, and so I wish him well to speed. Of late on Candlemas 
clay, the two ambassador's houses were so watched that 
dyvers mass-mongers not of their family were found and 
taken there: the Spanish is angry, but the other only pre- 
tends an anger. 

The Erie Bothwell fleeing out of Scotland, was taken beside 
Tynmouth, where he is in prison in the castle. 

A subsidy is agreed upon in the commons -house, like 
to the former,* with this amendment, the grant upon goods is 

* Camden says, that this Parliament " made wholesome laws for 
the relief of the poor, for matter of the navy, for maintenance and 
increase of tillage, for punishing of vagabonds, forgers of evidences, 
clippers, washers, rounders, and filers of money, fantastical prophe- 
seers, conjurors or sorcerers, and perjurers, for translating the Bible, 

&c Moreover the estates congratulating the happiness of the 

times, granted unto the Queen, for religion reformed, peace restored, 
England with Scotland freed from the foreign enemy, money re- 
fined, the navy renewed, warlike munition by sea and land provided, 
and for the laudable enterprise in France for the securing of Eng- 
land, and of the young King of France, and the recovering of Ca- 
lice, they granted (I say) the ecclesiastical men one subsidy, and 
the laity another, with two fifteens and tenths. A fifteen and a 
tenth (that I may note it for forrainers' sakes) is a certain taxation 
upon every city, borough, and town, not every particular man, but 



124 THE PARLIAMENT GRANTS A SUBSIDY. [FEB. 

from three pounds, wher the former was five pounds. The 
heades of both howses are fully occupyed with the provision 
of suerty to the realme, if God shuld to our plague call 
her Majesty without leaving of children. The matter is so 
depe as I cannot reache into it. God send it a good issue ! 
and so I end. From Westminster, the 7th of February, 1562. 
Yours assuredly, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Mr. Middlemore was redy, as they saye, even booted 
to have come towards you ; but the coming of the Admyrall 
to Harfleur dy verted his jornaye, so as he went thyther upon 
the tenth of this month. Sir Nicholas Throkmortoii is also 
this night at Portesmouth to pass over. I doo forbeare the 
returne of your servant, untill I may here from Mr. Throk- 
morton arryved at Newhaven. These six or seven dayes 
past here hath bene great tempests. I cannot see that any 
effect will come of the ernest sutes made by the three estates 
to the Queen's Majestic, either for mariadg or stablishing of 
succession. All thyngs here are quiet. 

I send you herewith a proclamation lately made, which ye 
maye shew to the Spanish ambassador there. I thynk every 
weke a month when I here not from you. The Admyrall of 
France shall have sufficient money to paye all his army, and 
one hundred thousand crowns (?) above. 18th Feb. 1562. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. CECILL. 

in general!, in respect of the fifteenth part of the wealth of the places. 
A subsidy we call that which is imposed upon every man, being cessed 
by the powle, man by man, according- to the valuation of their goods 
and lands. But neither is this nor the other taxation ever imposed, 
but by consent of the estates in parliament." 



1563.] AFFAIRS OF NORMANDY. 125 

CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Mr. Summer returned hither on Thursday at night, 
who, beside the letters which he brought, was able to report 
of certenty that which we here were very glad to here, 
I mean of the hurt of the Duke of Guise, whose soul I cold 
wish in heaven, and mine also. 

Since Sir Nicholas Throkmorton went * to Newhaven, I 
have herd nothyn certain of the Admiral, but that he should 
have putt two thousand men into Cane ; but the castle was 
held by the Marq. d'Elboeuf. His reystars shall receive their 
paye, of the which Mr. Throkmorton carries with him 
twenty thousand pounds, and yesterday I thynk passed ten 
thousand pounds more from Portesmouth. This day com- 
mission passes from hence to the Comte of Oldenburg, to 
levy eight thousand footmen, and four thousand horse, who 
will I trust pass into France with speed and corradg. He 
is a notable, grave, and puissant Captain, and fully bent to 
hazard his life in the cause of religion. 

The berer of their letters comes from the Lord of Led- 
dyngton, who is here, to motion to the Duke of Guise, and 
consequently to that King, that theQuene of Scots his mistress 
might be a moyenes of peace, but how unmete a mean some 
will thynk her, I dowt. Nevertheless the office is mete for a 
Christian Prince, and God send success ! 

I still stay your man until we may here what the Ad- 
miral f shall resolve with Mr. Throkmorton. 

And now I send you a packet which should have been sent 

* Sir Nicholas Throgmorton arrived at Newhaven the 14th of 
February. 

* On the 8th of February," says Stowe, " the said Admiral came 
before Harflew with six thousand horsemen, roisters, and others of 
his own retinues, beside footmen, and one thousand horsemen of 
the countries thereabout, and about six of the clock at night, there 
was a great peal of ordinance shot off at Newhaven for a welcome to 
the said Admiral. 



1*26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT. [FEB. 

to you by Mr. Middlemore, if the Admirallhad not come into 
Normandy : and although the tyme hath altered some thyngs 
therm, yet I do send the same, even sealed it upp as it was. 

I am so fully occupied to expedite matters in this parlement 
that I have no leasure almost to attend any other things. A 
subsydie and two fifteenths are granted as bigg as ever any 
was. A lyke is granted by the clergy. 

A law is passed for sharpening lawes agaynst Papists, 
wherin some dim" cultie hath bene, because they be made very 
penall ; but such be the humours of the commons house, as 
they thynk nothing sharp ynough ageynst Papists.* 

Very good lawes ar in hand for increase of fishermen, and 
consequently the maryners and navy. Fish is much favored, 
and Wednesdaye meant to be observed lyke Saturdaye, and 
sondry other thyngs therein provided.f 

I have bene author of a short law not ex ceding twelve 
lynes, wherby is ordered that if any man will sell any forrayn 
commoditye to any person, for apparell, and without redy 
mony, or without payment within twenty-eight dayes, the 
seller shall be without his remedy. 

There is also a very good law agreed uppon for indifferent 
allowances for servants' wages in husbandry. Many other 
good lawes are passed the nether howse ; as for toleration of 
usury under ten per cent., '(which notwithstanding I durst not 

* It is no wonder that the feeling against the papists was now very 
bitter. The proceedings of the Pope, and of the foreign governments, 
was quite a sufficient excuse for any violence that might have been com- 
mitted against them. At the Pope's council at Rome, this year, among 
other infamous resolutions, was the following. " A pardon to be granted 
to any that would assault the Queen, or to any cook, brewer, baker, 
vintner, physician, grocer, chirurgeon, or of any other calling whatso- 
ever, that would make her away. And an absolute remission of sins to 
the heirs of that party's family, and a perpetual annuity to them for 
ever, and to be of the privy council to whomsoever afterwards should 
reign." The whole of these resolutions are printed by Strype. 

t The Papists laughed at these fast days for the encouragement of 
fishing. The Wednesday they called Cecil's Fast (Jejunium Cecilia- 
num.} See Saunders de Orig. et Prog. Schism. Angl. 



156' 3.] TRIAL OF THE POOLS. 127 

iillovve) ; another against Egyptians ; another to remedy the 
defrauding of statutes for tilladg. 

Vesterdaie were condemned two Pools, Fortescugh, one 
Spencer, and Bingham, servants to the Lord Hastings of 
Loughborow, and one Barwyk. 

Fortescugh confessed all, and so was attainted, and is 
thereby never to take hold of mercy. The treasons were intents 
to cony with a power into Wales, and to proclaim the Scottish 
Queen. The tray tors seek their defence by saying that they 
meant it not before the Queen our Sovereign should die, which, 
as they were persuaded by one Prestall, should be about this 
March. But I trust God hath more store of his mercies 
for us, than so to cast us over to devouring lyons. 

I perceive an Italyon of this city is there secretly. I know 
of his departure, but he had no errand of me, nor I thynk 
of any belonging to this court : but offering service he was 
left to himself. It is Cavalcant, who I thynk will not appear 
to your sight a meddler; nevertheless I thynk he means 
well, and specially to get reputation. I will send your man 
as soon as I can hear from Newhaven. This last tempest 
hath cast away dyvers of our victuallers, some into Flanders, 
some to Calls, some to Rues. 

Sir Thomas Finch goes in place of Mr. Poynings, who 
returns to his chardg. 

Your old scholar Porn hath light into a great mishap, 
taken with a lewd manner in piking of gold buttons, and since 
other bryberyes found in his chamber : it shall be hard to 
recover his name. 27th Fibre. 1562. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 



SIR JOHN MASON TO SIR THOMAS CHALONER.* 

After most hearty commendations, with like thanks for 
your letters. The last came to my hands by your man 
* Now Ambassador in Spain. 



128 THE SPANISH AMBASSADOR TROUBLED. [FEB. 

Kinge. These are to advertise you that the occasion you 
have no oftener heard from me hath bene longe sicknes, 
wherewith I have byn touched in suche sorte ever sy thence 
Christemas, as neither had I anye power to write or to reede. 
I have nowe gotten the waye towardes healthe, thoughe yet 
I be not come to the ende thereof. 

I lyke verie well your verses made in the commendation 
of Mr. Shelley,* whose worthines you well and just- 
lie sett forth. And seinge in this tyme of leasure, you can 
be content to be occupied in suche vertuous exercises, I have 
thought good to seiide you certaine verses which Mr. Had- 
donf sent me for a newe yere's gifte, wishinge that at ydle 
tymes, you woulde give an assaye to make them speake 
Englishe, wherein there is no haste, but as your own fansye 
shall serve. 

It may fortune come to your eares that the Spanishe am- 
bassador hath lately byne here verie yll used, as indede 
the matter mought have bene better used by suche as 
were putt in trust, who abused their commission. The 
trewthe was that on Candlemas daye the Queue's Highnes 
beinge advertised that sondry of her subjects would that 
daye to bothe th'ambassadors howses to heare masse, and to 
be present at the rest of the ceremonyes wonte to be used on 
that daye, toke order by her councell that certaine should 
be sent to trie the trewthe thereof. Who mistakinge their 
instructions, went malepertlye to the places where the am- 
bassadors were at service, and there laide handes uppon 
certaine of her saide subjects. The meaninge was that they 

* Sir Richard Shelley, a popish refugee. 

f Walter Haddon, master of the requests, the intimate friend of Sir 
Thomas Smith. He was of a good family in Buckinghamshire, and 
fellow of King's College, Cambridge, and afterwards president of 
Magdalen College, Oxford, which he left on the accession of Queen 
Mary. Haddon wrote extremely good Latin. Elizabeth, who could 
appreciate scholars, said of Buchanan and him, " JBuchananum 
omnibus antepono, Haddonum nemini postpone." 



1563.] LADY CATHERINE GKEV. I _>}) 

should not have cntred within the gates, which hath becne 
declared to the ambassador, and I suppose he be satisfied. 

The earl of Hartforde, having by corruption of the keepers 
had secret access by night to the Lady Katherine, who 
by his company has brought a boy child to the world,* 
he has therefore bin called before the council in the 
starre-chamber, and hath for that offence a fine set on his 
head of fifteen thousand pounds, for the payment whereof an 
extent is gon upon his lands. His body to remain in 
prison during the Queue's pleasure. 

Yesterday the elder of the Pools and the second soon, 
with Anthony Forteskewe and four others, were arraigned at ... 
hall, and were there charged that theie meant to go into 
France, and to use the aid of the Duke of Guise for the 
making levy of six thousand men, to conveye the same in May 
next coming into Wales, and there proclaiming the Scottish 
Queen queue of England, and Arthur Pole, Duke of Clarence, 
to do their best to bring the Scottish Queen to the crown, of 
which matter they were openly convicted. Their only de- 
fence was that they meant to attempt nothing in the Queue's 
life time, who by conjuration they had found should not 
lyve passing the next spring. The rest of the matter was 
not denied ; and Forteskewe confessed the whole w T ithowt 
try all. The other were tried,but it fell owt as the other had 
confessed. 



* This unfortunate couple was certainly very severely dealt with 
and, in consequence, their cause was popular. On the 28th of January 
ary of this year, Sir John Mason writes to Cecil, " There be abroad 
both in the cite and in sundry other places of the realm, very broad 
speeches of the case of the earl of Hertford : sum following they re 
lewd affections, and sum others of ignorance make such talks 
thereof as likes them, not letting to say they be man and wief, and 
why should man and wief be let from coming together ? Theise 
speeches and others, as I am informed, be very common." Haines, 
p. 396. 

VOL. I. K 



130 LONDON NEWS. [FEB. 

Sir Edward Warner,* which I had almost forgotten, was, 
at first opening that the Ladye Katherine was with child, 
committed to the Tower uppon suspicion that he was not 
ignorant of the matter. But the matter falling out otherwise, 
his deliverye is loked for daylie. 

Feme beinge on Shrove Sondaye taken with the cutting 
of certaine buttons from the Erie of Shrewsburie's gowne, and 
thereuppon being had in suspicion of sondrie other pick- 
eryes, was therefore committed to the Marshallsee, whither Sir 
John Bow. . . and a brother of his be also committed, I thincke 
for matter of relligion. 

The Earle of Shrewsburie's sonne and heyre hath marry eel 
with the. Earle of Pembrook's daughter, and the Earle of 
Pembrook's sonne and heyre hath married with the Earle 
of Shrewsburie's daughter. t 

Bothe our hovvses have byn earnestly in hande with the 
Queene to appointe her successor, but she wyll not byte at 
that bayte, wherein in myne opinion she hath a better judg- 
ment then manye have of them that be so earnest in the 
matter. 

And thus I byd you most hartelye farewell. From London, 
the 27th of February, 1562. 

Your assured loving frend, 

JOHN MASON. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Although I have stayed your man long from you, yet 
if it wer not to offend you, I wold have stayed him longer ; 

* The Lieutenant of the Tower. 

t Francis, Lord Talbot, son and heir of George, sixth Earl of 
Shrewsbury, married Anne, daughter of William, Earl of Pembroke; 
and Henry, eldest son of the latter, and his successor to the title, 
married for his second wife, Catherine, daughter of the Earl of Shrews- 
bury. 



1563.] PROCEEDINGS AT NEWHAVEN. 131 

for that I have not sufficient matter from Sir Nicholas 
Throkmorton of his dealing with the admiral presently to 
send unto you. 

The last tidings from thence was of the taking of 
Humfleu, wherein one Captain Lyons had two hundred 
soldiers. And after that done, the admiral intended to de- 
part from thence, about the 14th of this month. So as I 
have ever since looked to have heard from Sir Nicholas 
Throkmorton, which hitherto I have not, although I imagine 
to do before I end this letter. 

The admiral had delivered to him in money the value 
of three hundred thousand crowns, and an assurance for 
other three hundred thousand crowns to be employed upon 
some Almaine army this spring, if otherwise cold not follow. 

The Conte Montgomery remains at Caen,* as lieute- 
nant under the admiral in Normandy. Newhaven is well 
rid of the Frenchmen by their occasions. And it is at this 
present very well manned and victualed. 

And where you heard a bruit of certain nombres of English 
men that should flee unto the Rhingrave, it is false, as it is re- 
ported. But yet some little occasion there was of that bruit ; 
for two English soldiers that had robbid their hoste's house 
in Newhaven, being a Frenchman, hearing that they should 
be hanged or punished for it, fled from justice, and for 
none other respect. Whom the Rhingrave wold not keep, 
but sent them away to Roan. 

Where you write of two impediments in the course of your 
treaty, the one growing by the Queen of Scott's ministers, 
the other by Cavalcant ; I can assure you that her minister 
that is here, professes as much earnestness in all his deal- 
ings to the crown of England, as he can, and for that pur- 

* The castle of Caen had been besieged by the admiral and Monte 
gomery since near the middle of February. It surrendered on the 
2d of March, and was followed by the immediate reduction ofBayeux, 
Faleise, and St. Loo. 

K 2 



132 THE PROVOST QF PARIS. [MARCH, 

pose did communicate with the Queene's Majestic his letters 
which he sent thither to the house of Guise. And therefore I 
thynke the Frenche are content to make some change them- 
selves, because hoping to fish more out them than they can 
get of you ; and true it is that he heere hath no more under- 
standing of our means then the Frenche embassadeur ought 
to have. 

As for Cavalcant, he hath wholly sought his merchant-lyke 
negotiation (as it seemeth) to do himself good, without more 
regard to th' one syde then to th' other, and so have I judged 
and dealt with him. 

The Provost of Paris's cause hangeth in theis tearmes. He 
forbeareth to answer, untyll th' ambassador obteyned lycence 
that Monsieur de Vaux might only see him in the Towre, with- 
out use of any speeche. And after that done, he hath made 
answer in writing with his owne hand falsely for the matter, 
and yet verie fondlie for himself. The copye of his answer 
I send you herewith. Th' ambassador coveteth to have him 
delyvered. But it is meant he shall make some better answer 
to the matter ; and therafter receyve such grace as his frends 
shall have reason to allow. 

By your last letters and copyes of other letters sent to you 
from Orleans, I see your great diligence, and to speake in 
proper tearmes, you deale verie cunningly, meete for the place 
you hold. The party which serveth your turne shold be well 
cherished and kept out of danger, whereby his service may 
last the longer. I have notified him and his service to the 
Queene's Majestic, and so wold you did let him know. Whilest 
I am writing theis letters, I feare the peace is made at Or- 
leans there, without consideration had of us ; * and if it be 
so, I know the worst, which is, by stout and stif dealing to 
make our owne bargain, and so is the Queene's Majestic 
fully bent and intended. 

* The Prince of Conde and the Protestants made a peace with their 
enemies at Orleans, without any consideration of their friends, the 
English. 



1563.] DKATH OF SIR THOMAS FINCH. 133 

Here bathe happened two days past a lamentable chance. 
Sir Thomas Finch * being appointed to be Marshall at 
Newhaven in the place of Sir Adrian Poynings, taking ship 
at Rye with thirty gentlemen, whereof two were brethern to the 
Lord Wentworthe, and some others of his name, were lost with 
the ship besides the Camber, coming in (driven to re- 
turn upon foul weather), before the tide was full to serve 
him. The loss is great, and he as much lamented as any 
man of his degree in any part of England. 

God send you power to give the Queen e's Majesty occa- 
zion to doo you the pleasure that you motioned, and therein 
I offer you my whole power. 

From Westminster, the 21st of March, 1562. 
Your assured to command, 

W. CECIL. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDONf TO CECIL. 

Sir, I understand a gentleman, one Skeleton, very near 
my native town, is departed, and doubt nothing but my con 
trymen make good speed for the wardeshippe. My mean- 
inge is not at this time to hinder any particidar suit : but 
I have oft thought to make a general suit to you for 
regard to that little angle where I was borne, called Coup 
land, parcel of Cumberland ;- the ignorantest part in 
religion and most oppressed of covetous landlords of any 

* Sir Thomas Finch, son of Sir William Finch, who had distin- 
guished himself in the French wars in Henry the Eighth's time, and the 
direct ancestor of the present Earl of Winchilsea. He was sent over 
to Normandy as Knight-Marshal of the forces in Newhaven. 

t Edmund Grindal, who was born at the village of Hensingham, 
near the town of St. Bees, in Cumberland, in which town he afterwards 
founded a free-school. He was master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge. 
In Queen Mary's days he took refuge in Frankfort, where he was 
during the troubles there. He was of a very amiable, meek, and 
pacific temper. He died in 1583. 



1:3-1 THE PLAGUE IN LONDON. [JlILY, 

one part of this realme, to my knowledge. I intende at my 
next coming to you, to discourse more largely of the state 
thereof, which, Godde willynge, shall be shortelie. I have no 
more to saye for this matter, but onlie to praye you if your 
graunte be not fullie past, to take order bothe for the goo^e 
education of the warde, and not to leave the poor tenantes 
subject to the expilations of those countrey gentlemen with- 
out some choyse, wherein if it please you to understande 
myne opinion, I will utter it simplie, accordinge to my under- 
standing. Godde keepe you ! 1 7th Maij, 1563. 
Yours in Christe, 

EDM. LONDON. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO CECIL.* 

After my hartie commendations to your Honor, considering 
and understanding none otherwise but by common reporte of 
the same, in what state the realme nowe standeth, mo- 
lested universallie by warre, and particularlie at London by 
pestilence, and partlie here at Canterburie by famyn, the peo- 
ple wanting their necessary provision, as is reported unto me, I 
thought it good upon my private consideration to call upon 
the Mayor and his coinynaltie on Frydaye laste, to mete with 
me at the cathedrall church, where I did myself exhorte them 
unto prayer, &c. And for hereafter have appointed them 
Fridayes to be used with prayer and preachinge, and Mun- 
dayes and Wednesdayes in their parishe churches, prescri- 
bing that common prayer that was apointed in the S wise's - 
tyme, alteringe a fewe wordes in the same. 

Sir, this I have done, not enjoyninge the lyke to the 
reste of my diocess, nor to the rest of my province, for the 
want of sufficient warrant from the Prince or Councell, 
wherof I do marvell that I have no advertisement. And al- 
though ye maye saye, we by our vocation shoulde have spe- 

* The famous Matthew Parker. 



156:3.] FKKNCH REFUGEES. 135 

ciall regard of such matter : yet, because we be holdeii 
within certain limits by statutes, we may stand in dowte 
howe it will be taken if we should give order herin, and 
therefore do not charge the rest of rny diocese with injunc- 
tion, as leaving them to there own liberty to follow us in 
the city for common prayers, if they will. If I had your 
warrant, I would direct my precepts, as I think very neces- 
sary, to exercise the said public prayers. And thus put- 
ting so much to your consideration, as I am sure otherwise 
fully occupied, I wish you the assistance of God in all good 
council. 

From my house at Bekesbourne,* the 23rd of Julie, 1563. 
Your Honor's always, 

MATTHUE CANTUAR. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO CECIL. 

I think we are bound to God (his visitation at New- 
haven consideredf), if we have tolerable conditions, much 
more if they be honourable. 

I pray you among your weighty affairs (as you may) 
remember to give to my Lord Mayor, and so other godly 
honest persons, order for the poor afflicted French, exiled 
for religion, that they be not taken as prisoners (as they now 
are at London), by virtue of your late proclamation, | wil- 
fully wrong understanded, lest that be one mean to insti- 
gate Godde's ire. I have sent to Quentin, your man, to re- 
member you of poor Leache's case. 

* Bekesbourn, near Canterbury, a favourite place of retirement of 
the Archbishop. 

t Newhaven was so severely visited by the plague, that the English 
were glad to quit it on any terms. 

+ The French, after the peace with the Protestants, had issued a 
proclamation, ordering reprisals on the English till Newhaven should 
be given up, in answer to which a similar proclamation had been 
made by the English government. The bishop's hint was not thrown 



13o LOSS OF NEWHAVEN. [AUG. 

I set forward to-morrow to Farnham,* having leftc tlu 1 
bookef in some readynesse, and willing Jugge to waytc 
upon you with it. I came Mr. Deane J with me. 

I am bownde to you and my Lady, that it pleased her to 
use my rude howse so frendly : her course heare deserved 
no thanks. Godde kepe you ! 1 August!, Saturday, 1563. 

Yours, 

EDM. LONDON. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

If you have wrytten anythyng sence Barloo cam from 
thence, you have no such cause to marvell as we here have : 
for sence his arryval here we have contynued in daylye expec- 
tation to here from you, how you, Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, 
wer accepted there, and, behold, in the midst of our expecta- 
tion, the first of August, in the morning, cometh the certenty 
of the rendryng of Newhaven, which, seing it pleased Al- 
mighty God to visit with such incurable infection, being as 
it semeth a denne of poyzon, it was well bargained to de- 
part it. 

What you now doo, we looke dayly to here ether from 
you, or by you, Sir Nicholas Throkmorton. As the tyme and 
carryer is, I can wryte no more. My Lord Admyrall is here ; 

away. " Aug. 5. Proclamation that no English, by colour of a Pro- 
clamatiori made the 13th of July, should molest any of the French 
dwelling gently in London." Burghley's Journal. 

* Farnham in Surrey, whose castle was a very ancient palace of the 
Bishops of Winchester. Bishop Grindal, who left London for a time 
to escape the plague, chose this place that he might enjoy the society 
of his old friend and fellow-exile, Robert Horn, Bishop of Win- 
chester. 

t The Book of Prayers for the Plague. 

i Alexander Nowcll, Dean of St. Paul's, who had in the first in- 
stance drawn up the Book of Prayers for this occasion. 



15(>3.] THE FRENCH KMKASSADOll IMPRISONED. 137 

my Lord of Warwyk at South wyk, by Portsmouth. 4th Au- 
gust, 1563. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. CECIL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Sense Barloo's arrival here, the 23 of this month, 
we can here of no manner of letters or message brought to 
the French ambassador,* who lies here at Eaton, better 
lodged than ever he was in England, at liberty to walk and 
ride where he will, and so he uses to ride much abroad. And 
therefore if he do not make very good report, he doth not 
deserve so good handling. He percase thinks that some- 
body regards him, but he is not thereof sure. 

My Lord of Hertford and my Lady Catherine, because of 
the plague, are thus delivered : he with his mother, as pri- 
sooner, she with her uncle my Lord John Grey.f 

The hostages,! also being afraid of the plague, shall be 
put to some custody abroad, but not as prisoners. I thynk 
two of them to Sir Richard Blunt's hows, ne'er Ridding, the 
other to Mr. Kenelm Throgmorton and Mr. Caroo . All our 
determinations depend upon such matter as we shall here 
from this French ambassador, who seems much to muse that 
he can here nothing. 

We here of sundry attempts intended against the lies of 

* The French ambassador had been put under restraint on account 
of the imprisonment of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton by the French. 

t In whose custody she died no long time after, and then the Earl 
of Hertford was set at liberty. 

J Given by the French for the delivery of Calais. They had lately 
made an attempt to escape. " June 19. All the hostages were taken 
going away with John Ribald." 

Perhaps one of the family of the Circus, seated at the splendid 
residence of Beddington, in Surrey. 



138 THE PLAGUE IN LONDON. [SEPT. 

Jcrsay and Gemsaye, for which purpose we have sent thi- 
ther shipps and men. 

They dye in London above one thousand in a weke.* 
I can wryte no more by this brynger. 20 August, 1563. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, I dowt much that if ye be at Pariss, and the Kyng 
still in Normandy, you are separate from all opportunity of 
service, specially from helpying Sir Nich. Throkmorton. I see 
you shall wynne great good will to recover him, and I thynk 
they have so small colour or pretence, that much labor must 

* The plague began in London on the 2nd of August. It had been 
imported from Newhaven, and made its appearance first in Kent. The 
whole number who died of the infection this year in London and the 
out-parishes, was 20,136. In the churchwarden's accounts of St. 
Margaret's, Westminster, printed in Nichols's Illustrations of Man- 
ners and Expenses, under this year, we have the following entry : 

" 1563, Item, to John Welch, for the killing and carrying away of 
dogs during the plague, and for the putting of them into the ground 
and covering of the same, 3*. 2d" 

And so again in 1592, when there was another very severe visita- 
tion by this destructive scourge. 

" 1592, Item, paid to the dog-killer for killing dogs the first time of 
infection, 16*. 

Item, paid more to the dog-killer, for killing more dogs, 10s. Wd. 
Item, paid more to the poor men for the killing of dogs, by Mr. 
Dean's appointment, 10s. 4>d. 

Item, paid more to the poor men for killing of dogs, 17s. 6d." 

The dogs were supposed to spread the infection a similar notion 
is said to exist in the East. The most curious thing, however, is" 3 the 
number of dogs which, by the sums of money paid, must have been 
killed in this latter year. It would almost seem as though at that 
time troops of dogs who had no masters, but lived on the offal which 
was thrown into the streets, infested London, as is still the case in many 
towns in the East. 



15()3.] Till: I'LACilK IN LONDON. 139 

obteync him. I marvel with what impudence the Queue 
Mother can answer her own letter to you, when you signified 
that some were coming. 

Good Mr. Smith, employ all your creditt, and assay the 
Protestants there, to do somewhat like to their promises. 
I marvel what answer the Prince and the admiral can 
make for the money lent them. 

The French ambassador here hath all honest entertain 
meant, and the hostages shall be delivered into the country, for 
fear of the plague. If other contrary report be made, require 
that the bearer hereof, the French ambassador's secretary, 
may be demanded, and if he shall say to the contrary, let 
him be required by you to write that he saith. And so I 
end. From Windsor, the 3rd of September, 1563. 

As yet I here not of Um. Killigrew. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 



SIR EDWARD WARNER * TO CECIL. 

Sir, 1 most heartily thank you for your gentle letter of late 
sent me by my servant. I have thereby good occasion to 
thynk your friendship passes not away with mine absence ; 
the which to my power I will ever be ready to acquit. Sir, 
the loss of Newhaveii so suddenly, and in such sort, as it sem- 
eth, T am sorry for, to the bottom of my hart. But against 
God's ordynanceno man can stand: and not deming otherwise 
than by the proclamation, I leve it, many times thinking of 
you, of the last word that ever ye said to me : which was, that 
you envied my felicity. And truly I thank God, I lyve here, 
though poorly, yet very quietly, and the country presently, 
thanks be to God ! very clear of al sickness, or other penurys 
other then now and then a ship taken by the French. God 

* The lieutenant of the Tower. 



140 LADY CATHERINE GREY'S FURNITURE. [SEPT. 

continue the one, and send sum spedy order for defence of 
the other. And now I say to you, that with all my hart I 
pity your burdene and travelsome lyf. 

You know I have often wyshed you to seke som relefe. Ye 
shal therby avoyd both envye and danger. But now perchance 
ye wil thynk I am too busy ; and therfore I wold no furder in 
these matters. But this I say, and you shal trust to it, if I 
were able eyther with counsel or otherwise to pleasure you, 
ye shuld be sure of it. 

Sir, my Lady Kateyrine is, as ye know, dely vered ; and the 
stuff that she had, I wysh it were sene, it was delyvered 
by the Queue's commandement, and she hath worn it now 
two yere's fill, most of it so torn and tattyred with her monkies 
and dogs, as wyl serve to smal purpose. Besydes, that she 
had one other chamber, furnished with stuf of myn, the which 
is almost all mard i also. Now, Sir, I wold be lothe to 
have now any more busynes with my Lord Chamberlayn, if 
it please you to move a word to hym, that I may quyetly en- 
joy it; for that it was delyvered by the Quene's pleasure, I 
trust he wyl be so content. If I have it not, sum of it is 
fytter to be gyven away, otherwyse then to be restored to the 
wardrobe agayn : and that I justify with my hand. If he lyke 
not that I shal have the bed of down, I shal be content to 
forbear it. I send you here inclosed a bill of the parcels, with 
some notes in the margent truly written.* If it please you to 

i Marred. 

* The following is the inclosure sent with this letter, which has 
been separated from the letter, and bound in another volume; the 
letter being contained in MS. Lansdowne 7. art. 33, and the inclosure 
in the same collection, vol. 5. art. 41. The observations in the margin 
are here printed within brackets. 

" Stuffe delivered in August 1561, by the Quene's commandment and 
the Lord Chamberlayn's warrante, by William Bentley, owt of the 
wardrobe in the Tower, to Sir Edward Warner, Knyght, then levete- 
nant of the said Tower, for the necessarye furniture of the Ladye Ka- 
teryn Graye's chamber. 

Furst, vi peces of hangings of tapestry to hang her chamber. 
[Thes be of dyverse sorts, and very owld and corse.] 



15(>3.] LADY CATHERINE GREATS FURNITURE. 141 

let me know your pleasure herin by two or three lines, Sir 
William Wodhouse will se it sent unto me, and whatsoever 
it is, I shall, as becomes me, take it in good part. And 1 
pray you, bear with me that I trobyl you with such a trifle. 
And thus I wysh you prosperous felicity, with increase of 
godliness. From my poor house at Plumsted, ne'er North - 
wych. This 8th of Sept. 1563. 

Yours most assured to command, 

ED. WARNER. 



THE BISHOP OF ELY* TO CECIL. 

Sir, Havyng occasion to send to my Lord Keeper, 1 
thought to salute you in two words. I have nothing to say, 
but in all doings, sayings, and writings to pray, God be 
merciful unto us ! God fighting against us with his plague, 
our enemies with swords, we against our own selves with 

Item, iij window pieces of like stuff. 

Item, a sparrer for abed of changeable silk damask. [All to-broken, 
not worthe xd.] 

Item, one silk quilt of red striped with gold. [Stark naught.] 

Item, one bed and bolster of down, with ij pillows ofdowne. 

Item, one white lining quilt stuffed with woll. 

Item, ij payer of fustians, th'one of vj breadths, the other of five. 

Item, ij carpets of turkey making. [The woll is all worne away.] 

Item, one small window carpet. 

Item, one chayer of clothe of gold, cased with crimson velvet, with 
ij pomels of copper and gilt, and the Queue's arms in the back. 
[Nothing worthe.] 

Item, one cushin of purpell velvet. [An owld cast thyng.] 

Item, ij foot stools covered with grene velvet. [Old stolys for 
King Henry's feet.] 

Item, one cupboard joined. 

Item, one bed, one bolster, and a counterpoint for hire women. [A 
meane bed.] 

t Richard Cox, born at Whaddon in Buckinghamshire. He was 
tutor to King Edward VI ; was made bishop of Ely in 1559, and died 
in 1580. 



142 THE FRENCH REFUGEES. [SEPT. 

shameles and open synnes ; God be merciful ! The prayer and 
fasting published abrode being so godly, I hope will do 
good. I wolde wish those strangers * of the Gospell mighte 
have favour, though theyr countreymen be our enemyes. 
God in his lawe ever tendreth the stranger. We must tendre 
them cum sint domestici Jidei, and God shall tendre us the 
better. God be mercifull to us, and prepare our harts to pray 
and hear our prayers too ! 

I trust, in this dangerous tyme, the courte is now not a 
courte, but a college of godliness. Dominus Jesus te nobis 
diutissime servet incolumem. 

From Somersham,t the 12th of Sept. I pray you, see 
what you can, that our dear Soveraygne may be saffe, mery, 
and godly. Iterum vale. 1563. 

Your assured, 

RICHARDE ELY. 



MARQUIS OF WINCHESTER TO CECIL. 

I commend me hartely to you, and think that the Queue's 
Majestic hath done very well to prorogue the parliament to 
October twelve monthes, and to adjorne the terme to Hillary 
next. The exchequer and the recit wil be well kept in Syon. 
And for the tryall, of that I have sent. And at Shene the 

* The French refugees. 

f Somersham in Huntingdonshire, where the bishops of Ely had for- 
merly a magnificent palace. There are now no remains of it. 

| Sir William Paulet, first Marquis of Winchester, lord treasurer 
of England both in this and the two preceding reigns, till his death in 
1572, at the age of ninety-seven. 

The palace of Sheen in Richmond. It was a house of the king 
as early as the reign of Henry 1. ; was allowed to fall into decay 
in the time of Richard II., but was restored by Henry V. Queen Eli- 
zabeth had been imprisoned there. During her life it was her favour- 
ite residence, and in it she died. The name of Richmond was not given 
to this town till the reign of Henry VII. 



1563.] INK TREASURER'S ACCOUNTS. 143 

courts of the Wards and of the Duchy may be well kept, if Mr. 
Sackvile * can be so pleased, whereof I dout, because he hath 
no other lodging nigh hand out of London ; to whom I have 
written, and shall have answer from him with speed. And 
upon his answer I shall return you perfect knowledge in all 
that matter. The money unpaid of the sales is between five 
and six thousand pounds, I know well. 

I have sent you notes of such warrants as I think good you 
procure at the Queene's hands for the better speed of her Ma- 
jestie's causes. I have written you a better account of the 
Duke of Florence's dett, and of my Lord of Westmerland's 
dett. The merchants dett, with the interest when you last 
putt over the same to this next November, was thirty-three 
thousand pounds ; and of that Mr. Bird hath discharged, 
and saved the interest upon the point of ten thousand 
pounds. So there rests to pay, I think not full twenty 
three thousand pounds ; to that must be added the interest 
upon twelve or thirteen in the hundred, as you did engage 
with them, whereupon were made no writings because 
they stand upon their surety of the Queene's land. And upon 
that they will call fast in November next, for then is their day 
to have payment with the interest, as Mr. Bird hath sent to me 
divers times, with whom I have taken order, to take the mer- 
chants' bills in payment, so they will receive no interest, 
wherein he will apply his diligence as the matter will serve. 

And for the furtherance of that matter, I think good the 
Queene's Majestic writ in some letter, and willed to see the 
merchants paid, and when I have paid to five thousand 
pounds, to call for a privy scale for such or more as the case 
shall require, because the privy seal cannot be needful for 
the whole. 

The surveyor of the works can deliver you a bill of all the 
Queene's houses of service : for he is not without one in his 
purse, another in his head. 

* Sir Richard Sackvile, who was under-treasurer of the exchequer. 






144 THE QUEEN'S HOUSES. [SEPT. 

And as this was written, Arthur Dakins, deputy receiver oi' 
Eboracum, wrote me answer to my letters, and therm writeth 
that my lord of Rutland* died at Wursope, in his jorney to- 
wards London, of whom the Queene hath lost a good 
servant. Thus fare you well. 

Written the 23rd day of September, 1 563. 

Your loving frend, 

WINCHESTER. 

I thinke no howse of the Queene' s t about London within 
twelve myles meet for her Grace's accesse to, before the feast 
of All Saints. Then I note you theis howses after wrytten 
to serve if need require. 

Hatfeld. 

Graftone. 

The Moore. 

Woodstock. 

Langley, no good wynter howse, and yet my Lady's of 
Warwycke for tearme of life. Homewards from Langley 1 
cannot bryng the Queene but by Reding and by Newberie, 
where they die. Wherin may be great perill, more then I 
wish shold be. 

I think her Majestie's best waye, where her Highnes now 
is in Wyndsore, if health there continewe: though the 
howse be colde, which may be holpen with good fyres. 
And if her Highnes shalbe forced to remove, as God forbid, 
1 think then best the houshold be put to boarde wages, and 
certayne of the counsell appointed to wayt, and herselfe to re- 
payre to Otland, 1 where her Majestic may remayne well, if no 

* Henry Manners, second Earl of Rutland, who finished the build- 
ing of Belvoir Castle. 

t " The Queen was nowat Windsor, whence, for the danger of in- 
fection, he advised that she removed not." Note by Strype in margin 
of the original. The queen, after all, did not go further from London 
than Windsor. She also passed the winter there, during which time 
she is said to have read and studied much. 

1 Oatlands. 



1563.] SCOTTISH PRIESTS IMPRISONED AT YORK. 145 

great resort be made to the hows, and by this doing the peril 
of all removes shall be taken away, and the great charge that 
thereof follows ; and there is at hand Hampton Court, 
Richmond, and Eltone, large houses for rooms, and good ayre. 
And now cold whether and frosts will bring helthe, with 
God's help. The rest of the houses the Surveyor can name 
you. Your friend, 

WINCHESTER. 

Warrants to be made 
For Ireland. 

The Merchants Adventurers, . s. d. 

The Surveyor of the Works for . . 300 00 00 

And more for the repair of Hatfeld . 100 00 00 

For the Grooms of the Chamber . . 1000000 

For the buildings and extraordinaries of 

Berwick . 7000 00 00 

To the armoury upon their bill . . 7951 00 00 

To th'ordinance upon their bill . . 7186 00 00 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK * TO CECIL. 

After so lunge rest, having this convenient messenger, 
Master Askam, I cannot omit my hearty salutations in these 
few words, and therewith most heartily desiring you that I may 
know the privy e counsel's pleasure, by your good means, con- 
corning the imprisonment of the Scottish priests remain 
ing in the castle of York, whereof I have advertised the 
Lords of the counsel by my several letters, and as yet have 
not known their pleasure therein. I am constrained to 
trouble you with this suit, partly for pity of some of them 
being utterly destitute of relief, and such as I hope well of for 
the time to come, and partly for their continual crying upon 

* Thomas Young. He was one of the second batch of bishops 
created in this reign, when he was appointed to the See of St. David's. 
He was translated to York the 20th of February, 1560. 

VOL. I. L 



146 IRELAND THE BUTLERS. [OCT. 

me. And thus I byd you most hartelie farewell. From my 
manor, at Cawood,* the 3rd dale of October, Anno Dni. 1563. 
Your loving frende assuredly, 

THO. EBOR. 



PIERS BUTLER f TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My most humble dutie to your Lordship premised, these 
are to advertise your honor that Sir Edmund Butler, Mr. 
John Butler, James and Edward Butler, my Lord of Or- 
mond's brothers, came in warlike array, with their trayn, the 
second of this present moneth of October, and invaded and 
spoyled my poore tenants and countrey under the Queue's 
Majestic of the value of one thousand pounds in cattell, 
household stuff, and apparel, as though they were mortall 
enemyes, alledging that I have caused the White Knight's J 
sonne to take the prey of a villadg called the Grag, and that 
my sonne and others of my men were assisting him in so 
doing. And the same allegation being made by him, the 
said Sir Edmond, after the said enormous spoyle, was by me 
answered in this manner, that I would myself deliver such 
persons as he should name of my men, or at my leading or 
commandments offending, into th'hands of the suffrain ' of 
Clonmell, the mayor of Waterford, or any other indifferent 
man, to be tried according to justice. Which he did refuse, 
and refused also to restore any the goods to the poore men, 
unles he had pledge into his hands for the contentation of 
his own desyre, which I thought not indifferent using me, 

* Cawood Castle, on the Ouse, in Yorkshire. 

t Piers Butler is not, as may be presumed from his signature, Lord 
Caher, but younger brother to the first, uncle to the second, and 
father of the third, Lord Caher. 

J Piers Butler's daughter Evelyn was married to the White Knight's 
son ; subsequently the White Knight. 

Theobald Butler, created the third Lord Caher. 
1 Sovereign. 



Trinu i.i;.\( K OF THE BUTLERS. 1=17 

after the like extreme sorte, as he is accustomed to serve me. 
What further disorder or spoyle shalbe committed by him I 
know not. Therfore, my good Lord, for as moche as, God 
knoweth, I am guiltles in any matter the said Erie or Sir 
Edmond do lay to my chardg, yet I am pleased to deliver 
such persons as shal be named to me of my servants and 
men, to have offended the said suffrain or maior or other in- 
different men, in hands to answer for suche things as shal be 
objected against them, which I thinke to be sufficient, and if 
it be not, I will always be prest and ready to do any thing 
your Honor will think reasonable, humbly beseching your 
Lordship, for as moche as I and all myn must be forthcoming 
to answer before all suche judges and commissioners as your 
Honor will think indifferent for me, beseching your Lordship 
therfor not onely to command my said Lord of Ormond to 
cause the said Sir Edmond and the rest of his brothers to 
restore the poore men to their goods, but also to see cor- 
rection done for the said disorders, and even see to com- 
mand them not to commit any the like offences herafter, if 
it will stand with your Honor's pleasure, the rather that 
the said Sir Edmond is bolder to committ the like, for that no 
order is taken with him for his manifold injuries done to me 
without occasion ministered of my side, as knoweth the Lord, 
who did have your honorable estate in his. 
From the Cahir,* the llth of October, 1563. 

Your Lordship's assured to command, 

PIERS CAHIR. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO CECIL. 

Whereas I understande that the parsonage of Awthroppe,f 
within the diocese of Liricolne, and neverthelesse bordering 
upon my diocese, is nowe voyde by the deathe of the late 
incumbent there. 

* In the county of Tipperary. f Authorpe, in Lincolnshire. 

L 2 



148 STATE OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND. [NOV. 

I am now occasioned to commende unto you one Mr. 
Thomas Lakyns, Master of Arte, and one of my contynuall 
preachers, borne in Lincolneshere, and worthie for all re- 
spects to have that roome, if it were foure tymes the value. 
It may please you therefore, accordinge to your accustomed 
goodnes, to commend the said Mr. Lakyns unto the Quene's 
Majestic, who is the patron thereof, so^ that by your good 
meanes he may have the preferment of the same. I wold her 
Highnes had good store of such men to bestowe her presenta- 
tions upon. And yet ones againe I moste ernestlie desire you 
that I may be advised of the counsell's pleasure concerninge 
the Scottishe priestes, whom, by virtue of their honorable 
letters, I have imprisoned in the castell of Yorcke. 

If I were not well persuaded of your vigilance and care- 
fullnes in placing of offices, I wold somewhat travell with 
you by my writinge that in the placing of the president of 
the Northe, there mought be due consideration and foresight 
that the factions and partaking in matters of reformation 
and justice might be well mett withall, which hitherto hath 
too muche reigned in these partes, to the greate greefe of the 
good sorte of people, and encouragement of the evyll. 

And thus, with my verie hartie commendations, I committ 
you to the tuition of God, who assiste you in all your doings, 
and give you healthe bothe of bodie and sowle. 

From my Manor of Bysshopsthorppe, the 5th of November, 
1563. Yor loving frend, assuredlie, 

THO. EBOR. 



THE BISHOP OF CARLISLE TO CECIL. 
Beyng not able to rendre condigne thanks (right honorable 
consailor) for your manyfolde kyndnes towardsmecontynually 
declared, but especially tenderyng so moche my late sicknes, 
for your travaile in my licence obtainyng, without which my 
life had ben in danger : because I can no otherwise recom- 
pence it, I shall contynue my prayer to God for your pre- 



1563.] STATE OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 149 

servation, and be ready with my poor service to my power. 
God has sent me better health, but not yet perfect. His will 
be done ! Tendering the state of this country, I am com- 
pelled to make suite for your furtherance in remedying the 
same. And first, by the absence of the Deane of Carlisle, 
Mr. Doctor Smith, that church goes to decay : their 
wodes almost destroyed, a great part of the livings under 
color conveyed to their kynsmen, themselves taking the pro 
fits, and that for three or four- score years, their statutes ap- 
pointing but only twenty-one. Where for reparations is allow 
ed yearly a hundred pounds, there nothing done. And where 
thirty pounds is allowed for the poor and mending the 
highe-wayes, almost as little is done. No residence kept ; 
no accounts ; the prebendaries turning all to their own 
gain ; which when I go about to reform in my visit 
tion, can take no place, because they are confederate to- 
gether, and the losses their own. Three of them are un 
learned, and the fourth unzealous. Briefly the city is de- 
caid by them, and God's truth sclanderyd. Considering 
the warden of the marches, whomsoever it pleasith the Quene's 
Majesty to appoint, (to my poor judgement,) it were good 
there were some wise, grave men of experience adjoined with 
him in commission, for it is harde to find a man that shall 
not quickly be corrupted here, and buy and sell poor men, 
their goods, and lives. I am so vexed with the church, not for 
my own matters, but matters of the late Bishop Oglethorpe,* 
that my liberties help me not. Wherefore I am compelled to 
sue for the Quene's confirmation, in the which I desire your 
lawful furtherance. The like I beseech you to extend to- 
wards the poor city of Carlisle, which is sore oppressed, and 
therefore deceit. From the Rose Castle in Cumberland, by 

Your orator, 

JOANNES CARLIOLEN. 

* Owen Oglethorp, President of Magdalen College, Oxford, was 
consecrated Bishop of Carlisle, by Mary, in 1556, and was deprived in 
1559. He it was who crowned Elizabeth. 



150 STUKELEY THE PIRATE. [NOV. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, I beseche you, procure for me a booke of Dionisius 
Halicarnass. of late yeres printed, not of the story, but of 
Thucydides.* I meane, you see, by parcells to fall into dett 
with you, but I pray you lett me know certenly the prices 
thereof. 

The bearer herof, Mr. Cambell, is a very honest gentil- 
man, and one, I thynk, that may be trusted. 

Mr. Somers departed from hence yesterdaye. Our adven- 
turers in the west have hitherto good ventures. Yesterday 
Mr. Stucklyf cam to the court, with certen French captayns 

* Probably this was the edition of Dion. Hal. de Thucydidis Historia 
Judicium, Andrea Duditio Pannonio interprete, printed by Aldus at 
Venice, in 1560. 

t Thomas Stukeley was one of the most extraordinary characters of 
the age in which he lived. He was, according to Fuller, a " younger 
brother of an ancient, wealthy, and worshipful family," near Ilfra- 
combe in Devonshire. One of the name was Sheriff of Devonshire, 
early in Elizabeth's reign. Among the old ballads in the British Mu- 
seum, are two copies of a ballad on Stukeley, which has been printed 
in Evans's Collection of Old Ballads ; in this ballad he is called (in- 
correctly, perhaps) " a wealthy clothier's son," and the following odd 
account is given of his early history : 

" He serv'de a bishop in the west, 
And did accompany the best, 
Maintaining of himself in gallant sort. 

Being thus esteemed, 

And every where well deemed, 

He gain'd the favour of a London dame, 
Daughter to an alderman, 
Curtis he \v r as called then, 

To whom a suitor gallantly he came." 

They were married, and then 

" Thus, in stale and pleasure. 
Full man v da vs they mea.surc, 
Till cruel death with his regardless spight. 



15()3.] STUKELEY THE PIRATE. 151 

whom he took coming from Florida. They were the French 
men whom John Rybault left last year in Terra Florida, 
whichperceavingthat Rybault cam not, thought best to come 
from thence in a vessel made by themselves. 

Bore old Curtis to the grave, 

A thing that Stukely wished to have, 

That he might revel all in gold so bright. 

He was no sooner tombed, 
But Stukely he presumed 

To spend a hundred pound a day in waste ; 
The greatest gallants in the land 
Had Stukely 's purse at their command. 

Thus merrily the time away he past. 

Taverns and ordinaries 
Were his chiefest braveries, 

Golden angels there flew up and down ; 
Riots were his best delight, 
With stately feasting day and night, 

In court and city thus he won renown. 

Thus wasting lands and living, 
By this his lawless giving, 

At length he sold the pavements of the yard, 
Which covered were with blocks of tin, 
Old Curtis left the same to him, 

Which he consumed lately as you've heard. 

Whereat his wife sore grieved, 
Desiring to be relieved, 

" Make much of me, dear husband," she did say. 
" I'll make much more of thee," said he, 
" Than any one shall, verily:" 

And so he sold her clothes, and went his way." 

The earliest document I have yet met with relating to Stukeley, is a 
note of Privy Council,.at the commencement of the reign of Elizabeth, 
(1558,) relating, apparently, to a legacy which he claimed. (< A let- 
ter to Thomas Stukeley, that where order was heretofore given him 
to forbeare to enter the houses, open the chestes, or meddell with the 
goods of Serjeant Predeaux deceased, he hath contrary to that order 
sithens so don, he is therfore eftsoones required to abstaine from the 
mcdling thcrwith, uritill the lawe shall have determyned the right herin, 



152 THE PLAGUE IN LONDON. [NOV. 



We heare a bruit that the Conte d'Egmont shuld come 
hyther in ambassade, but it semeth so strange that I cannot 
yet beleve it. 

The deth of London the last weke was 300. The terme 
shall be kept at Hartford Castell. From Wyndsor, the 28 
of November, 1563. 

I pray you contynew your occurrences, whatesover hath 
bene therin misreported to you. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 

as he will answer for the contrarye, and to delyver the same goods by 
byll endentid, for the redelivery wherof, if the lawe shal be founde 
on his side, bondes are already taken here." (MS. Lansd. 238, fol. 5, 
vo.) 

Stukeley, says Fuller, " having prodigally misspent his patrimony, 
he entered on several projects, (the issue general of all decaied estates,) 
and first pitched on the peopling of Florida, then newly found out in 
the West Indies. So confident his ambition, that he blushed not to 
tell Queen Elizabeth, that he preferred rather to be soveraign of a 
mole-hill, than the highest subject to the greatest king in Christendom ; 
adding, moreover, that he was assured he should be a prince before his 
death : I hope, (said Elizabeth) I shall hear from you, when you are 
instated in your principality. I will write unto you, (quoth Stukeley.) 
In what language ? (saith the Queen.) He returned ; In the stile of 
princes : To our dearest sister." 

Haynes has printed an order of the Queen to the Earl of Sussex, 
then in Ireland, dated June 30, 1563, stating that, If< our servant 
Thomas Stuckly, associated with sondry of our subjects, hath prepared 
a nomber of good shipps well armed and mann'd, to pass to discover 
certen lands in the west towardes Terra Florida, and by our licence 
hath taken the same voyadg," and ordering that he should be received 
in Ireland, if driven there by stress of weather, " which, if he shall, he 
hath agreed to doo any manner of service ther, that shall be thought 
agreable by you for our purpose." It appears that a part of 
Stukeley's commission was to take French ships, which were to be 
held until the intentions of the French king were better seen. Accord- 
ing to Fuller, his Florida project failed for want of money. 



1563.] TRANSACTIONS WITH FRANCE. 153 

CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, I hartely thank you for your letters. I am sorry that 
you shall be so soddenly interrupted, as by the Queue's Ma- 
jestie's letters you shall see occasion. The causes come 
from hence, as I thynk, by letters or reports, or both, brought 
hither by this brynger, Barnaby. He sayth nothing to me 
of those thyngs which I heare otherwise he hath sayd. The 
particularities I will rather utter to some of yours, than 
wryte at this tyme. I feare thyngs be not evenly carryed. 
But sence, by such occasions as her Majestic hath gathered 
by advises brought by this messenger, she is resolved, as I 
see, to pass another way, and change her cours, I must obey, 
arid conform myself therunto, and so must you, praying God 
that therof may follow that which her Majestic desireth and 
looketh for. 

This alteration of your speche into Latin, I thought to be 
very strange, but surely her Majestic hath had occasion 
ministered by such reports as now wer brought, to thynk the 
same best. And therfore, consideryng I know very well ye 
can doo this in the Latyn as well as any man, I nothyng 
dowt but ye will well do it. The French ambassador desyr- 
ing audience on Mondaye,* was differed ad incertnm diem, 
which he taketh greevously. But I thynk he shall be herd 
this daye or to-morrow. Of late he hath conceaved some of- 
fence to me uppon this occasion. Stuckley staying uppon 
his voyadg into Florida, and sendyng some of his shipps to 
the sea, to aventure agaynst Frenchmen, took certen French- 
men that wer out of Florida, being of the nombre which 
Rybault left there.f And being here at the court with the 

* Probably, on occasion of a brawl he had had with the provost of 
Eton College, 

t Florida, said to be so called because it was first visited by Euro- 
peans on Palm Sunday, was discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, whilst 
in search of the "fountain of youth," which a legend of the natives of 



154 TRADE WITH THE NETHERLANDS STOPPED. [DEC. 

chieffest, he putt hym to liberty uppon his fay th, conditionally, 
that he shuld speake with no Frenchman. But yet the 
prisoner stole to Eaton to speke with the ambassador, and 
Stuckley hearyng therof, sent for hym, and beat him ; wherwith 
the ambassador being offended sent to me to complayne, and 
I rebuked Stuckly therfor roundly, although he did reason- 
ably justify it, &c. The daye following the ambassador's se- 
cretary cam to know what I had done. I told hym how 1 had 
rebuked Stuckly, and what his answer was. " Well," quoth 
the Secretary, " my master will advertise the Kyng, who will 
revenge it." " What," quoth I, " Monsieur, ye are too hoote, 
ye speke herin but foolishly :" using the word sottement. 
' Why," quoth he, " call ye me a foole ?" " No," quoth I. 
" but I tell you what I thynk of your words." Hereuppon 
he departed furiously, and so the ambassador conceaveth 
much offence agaynst me ; but I must wear it away. The 
Kegent and the E stats of the Bass Country s have commanded 
that none of our clothes shall come into the countrey before 
Candlemas, for feare as they alledg of the plage ; but we may 
suspect worse. They sprede very ill rumours of lack of justice, 
of pillage, &c.* Indede, some cause they may have at this 



Puerto Rico placed in this part of the world. The name was then 
applied much more extensively than at present. - The part which the 
French attempted to colonise during the religious troubles of the reign 
of Charles IX., was by them called Carolina. This French colony 
endured incredible hardships, and was finally extirpated by the 
Spaniards, who sent an expedition for this purpose in 1564. 

" The councell of king Philip at Bruxels," saith Stowe, " com- 
manded proclamation to be made in Antwerp and other places, that no 
English shipp with clothes shoulde come into any places of their Low 
Countries : their colour was (as they sayd) the danger of the plague, 
which was at that time in London and other places in England. Not- 
withstanding, they would gladly have gotten our wooles : other causes 
they alleged, as the raising of importes as wel upon goods inwards as 
outwards, as well upon Englishmen as upon strangers, &c. Also for 
that in the first parliament of the Queene's Majestic, by a statute then 



1563.] SIR THOMAS CHALOXER. 155 

tyme, when our adventurers have the seas so much, and miss 
a Frenchman's vessell to seeke French goods in Flemings' 
vessells. But surely these complaynts are augmented with 
malyce and fraud, to sow division betwixt us and the king of 
Spayn, and especially by the Esterlyngs, and such as wold 
have our merchants less favoured in Antwerp. Heruppon 
it is thought mete to appoynt an extraordinary commission, 
to heare and determyne their complaynts summarie ; and also 
to send Mr. Lews or Dale with a report of all the orders and 
judgments gyven in ther favor, sence the deth of the Bishop 
of Aquila.* 

Sir Thomas Challoner being dangerously sick, without hope 
of recovery, but by returning, is now revoked upon that con- 
sideration, and offer made to the Kyng to send one thyther or 
into Flanders in his stede. 

Indeed we covet rather to have hym in the Low Countries, 
for there we see most use of an ambassador. 

You maye take occasion to speke of this matter to the 
Spanish ambassador there, so as if he shuld here any thyng 
hereof, he might by you know the truth. 

It appereth to me by indirect speche here used, that at this 
tyme it is understand that you and Mr. Throkmorton shuld 
not so well accord, as wer mete, wherof I trust, nevertheless, 
both you for your wisdoms will have regard, and one of you 

made, divers wares and commodities were forbidden to be brought 
into this realme out of Flanders or other places, being 1 wrought there, 
which was done to the end to set our subjects a worke here, as by the 
statute doth appeare, for that no man, English or stranger, might ship 
out any white clothes undrest, being of the price above 4 pounds, with- 
out licence, &c.; but the Queene's Majestic through sute of our marchant 
adventurers, caused the w ooll fleete to be discharged, and our cloth 
tleete was sent to Emden in East Friseland, about Easter next follow- 
ing, in an. 1564." 

They complained also of their ships taken and plundered by priva- 
teers and free-booters on the seas. 

w He died in London in this year. 



156 STATE OF RELIGION. [DEC. 

beare with the other, for so shall ye both deserve commenda- 
tion. And so I end. From Wyndsor, the 16th of December, 
1563. Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



THE BISHOP OF ELY TO CECIL. 

Syr, hitherto I have made you no answer to your frendly 
letters, which ye sent me in September last, wherin were 
lyvely sparkes of godlynes, wishing us to preache and cry 
out for repentance, which undoubtedly ought to be one prin- 
cipall poynte of all preaching ; and with all the layemeii 
(say ye) talke in corners. That example in preachers were 
never worse, so covetouse, so undiscrete, so rash, so negligent 
they be, &c. for Christ's passion. Let every priest, high and 
lowe, be burdened particularly. Let it be said to the accused, 
redde rationem mllicationis tuce, 8$c. Let them not be 
sclandered generally, and snatched at in corners ; that is no 
charitie, nor godly policie, for this is the fetch of the adver- 
saryes of truth, whether theie be neuters, papists, or camall 
gospellers, to deface the parsons, that the worde may be dis- 
credited, and theie interim licenter vivant, genioque impune 
indulgeant, fyc. For my parte, I loke dayly to be called before 
the judgmente seate of Christ; my travaile is to presente 
hym an upright conscience. Touching the former faults: 
Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc jitstificatus sum. 
In other sorts besyde the clergyes, it is toto horrible to see the 
wyckednes abrode. It is true almost everywhere : dixit in- 
sipiens in corde suo, non est deus. I feele sometyme, will I, 
nill I, the heavy affection which was in David : Deduxerunt 
oculi mei lachrymas quid non custodierunt legem tuam. I 
praise God, thatthe Queeiie's Majestic (as you wryte) is such a 
good student, &c. But when all is done, the majestie of the 
scripture is that that pierceth : vivus est sermo Dei, fyc. 
Chrysostomus et Greed interdum Pelagianizant, Bernardux 
monachizat. I trust her Grace meddleth with them but sue- 



1563.] STATE OF RELIGION. 157 

cisivis horis, nam alto earn vacant neyotiorum undce. I wish 
her Majestie somtymes to be well refreshed and pleasaiite, 
ut possit durare el dm vivere. Hosius' bokes flye abrode 
in all corners, unica gloriatio omnium papistarum, who 
swarme in all corners, saying and doing almost what they 
lyste. You have encombered me with one, &c. If Godde's 
adversaryes and the Queene's may be thus tolerated agaynst 
God and the Queene, and we preach and crye against 
them, and be mocked and gyred at, and dayly sclandered in 
corners, intolerabilis fuerit dei offensa formidandaque pie- 
tatis et regni ruina. Syr, Mr. Straunge is a good and a 
zealouse gentleman, the Queene's Majestie' s olde and most 
faithfull servant ; he is very poore and in debt, forced to sell 
his office, and not able to sustayne his familie : I pray you 
put yourself in his case, and helpe hym as ye maye. Dominm 
Jesus te nobis diutissime servet incolumem. From Down- 
ham,* 28th of December. 

Hartylye yours, 

RICHARDE ELY. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, here hath of late been such accidents, as hath de- 
tayned your servant Barloo from a full depeche theis fifteen 
dayes. The matter for accepting of the election of my Lord 
of Leicester to be of that ordre,t hath bene here sondry tymes 
dyversly intended, sometyme to accept it alone, sometyme 
with a companion, and for hym some alteration, sometyme 
my Lord Marquess, sometyme my Lord of Sussex, sometyme 
my Lord of Norfolk hath bene required. In the end the 
Queue's Majestie meaneth to differr all. And besyde 
this variation, wherin wer spent almost twelve dayes, the 

* Downham, in the Isle of Ely. 

t The King of France had elected the Earl of Leicester to the order 
of St. Michael, on the conclusion of the peace. 



158 UNUSUAL FROSTS. [DEC. 

cold here hath so assayled us, that the Queene's Majestic 
hath bene much troubled, and is yet not free from the same 
that I had in November, which they call a pooss, and now this 
Christmass to keep her Majestic company, I have bene newly 
so possessed with it as I cold not see, but with somewhat 
ado I wryte this. I have made four several letters for her 
Majestic to wryte to you, but nether hath she had commodite 
to sign one, nor now doth the contents remayne to be signed. 
But I hope within two dayes her Majestic will be able to 
signe, and then your servant shall not tarry six howres after. 
Her Majestic is only combred with payne in her nose and 
eyes, otherwise she is, thanked be God ! in good and perfect 
helth. 

On newe yere's daye shall the intercourse open, and thereof 
I send you that which shall be proclaimed. By your servant, 
I will advertise you of other things. 

And so I take my leave. From Westminster, the 29th of 
December. 

We have had perpetuall frosts here sence the 16th of this 
month. Men doo now ordinaryly pass over the Thamiss, 
which I thynk they did not sence the 8th yere of the reign of 
King Henry the VIII. 

Here are no newes with us at all. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, I have much cause to thank you for your frendly 
dealing with me, and as much or more cause to prayse you 
for your oppen and playne dealyng, which I assure you on my 
fayth I doo allow more in you, than any other poynt of yo ur 
frendshipp. I love wisedom and honor it, but when slights 
and crynks are joyned therewith, as I am sorrye sometyme to 



15(>3.] ( KCIL AND SMITH. J 50 

see, commonly thereof follows infinite incommodities both 
to the party that uses them, and to them also that are ther- 
with advised. I know the place which I hold hath been of 
years not long passed, adjudged a shop for cunning men, 
and yet surely I thynk the opinion commonly conceived 
thereof, hath been worse than the persons deserved. Some 
cause I have so to thynk > that, knowing before Almighty God 
my disposition to deal with all men plainly, and indeed 
my unhabilitie, or as I may say of myself my dullness to in- 
vent crafts, yet do I not escape evil judgment, desirous to 
avoid as much as I may that opinion ; and where I cannot, 
content with patience and testy money of my own conscience 
to endure. But behold I am entry ng at a lardge gate, to behold 
mine owiie misery, which for avoiding of you trouble I will 
not pursew now. To your self I will now come ; you have 
not been well used, but by whom percase you may know 
better than I. You have been also well used, and of whom 
I will not speak, considering I know no man hath done 
more then honesty and reason wold. I have told this berer 
somewhat, whom I take to be honest, quyett, and wise : and 
glad I am that he comes, although your servant Wilson 
was by me first appointed to have gone, but upon another 
occasion, as Mr. Summer shall tell you, that was changed. 

I have spoken with Wilson, whom Mr. Sheres friendly ad- 
vised to be plain with me, but in talk with him, I thynk 
he intended rather to serve his promise made upon a slight 
ground, then his duty being required by you. All that he 
tells me touching myself, was that he should say, that if 
I were sent into France to treat with you in this matter, I 
might do more good than another, a matter barely told, but 
I thynk it had many other branches, which surely I do not 
esteem. God amend them that, meaning to make trips of 
malice, are for the more part trapped themselves. I shall 
speak like an Italian idiot ! God send them both to amend, 
and to doo as well as I wold myself, and this I say with the 
testimony of a good conscience ; which mind I gather not 



160 NEGOTIATIONS WITH FRANCE. [JAN. 

of any other philosophy, but of his precepts that hath com- 
manded me to love my enemyes, for therin onely is the differ- 
ence betwixt a Christian and a gentile. For yourself I nede 
give you no counsell, but I wish you to have the lyke mynd. 
For when all the glorye and wytt, when all the wealth and 
delyte of this world is passed, we must come before that 
Judg that will exact this rule of us, to discern us from the 
gentiles. Good Mr. Smyth, take my low base stile in this 
fond moode in good part, and behold it not with the wisedom 
of the world, for though my outward actions are most commonly 
in publick thynges of the world, yet, I thank God, I doo sub- 
myt all my conceites and thoughts as mere folly, to the 
wisedom and piety of the gospell. You may saye it is strange 
to see a secretary of estate, that is an artificer of practises 
and counsells, to fall thus low into divinitie. Well, so symple 
I am, whatsoever the world may judg of me for the place, and 
therin percase I do deceave the world. 

Now shortly to our matter : you are willed to make peace, 
but the meanes are prescribed, which I and others thought 
unlykely three months past : but now I fynd dyverse here 
persuade themselves with the contrary. Surely you shall have 
good luck and great praise, and therfor labor it. I was gladd 
this berer should come to gyve a testymony of your dilligence, 
fayth, and wisedom, for so shall he do you much pleasur. 
And although the matter seme hard, yet forbeare not to use 
all meanes to recover it, wherin, being obtayned, your praise 
shall be the greater, and being not, yet they w r hich have de- 
syred it, shall thynk your labour well bestowed. Indede if our 
other neighbor on that syde the seas, wer as inward a frend 
as reason wold even for his own interest, I then wold not 
dowt of this good end. But as this berer shall shew you, the 
case is otherwise. I hartely thank you for the Polydore, and 
for Onuphrius : Onuphrius' works I had recovered here be- 
fore, but Polydore not. If you please the Onuphrius shall be 
kept for yourselfe, or if I may know the price, I will gladly 
paye for them. 



1564.] OSORIO'S BOOK AGAINST ELIZABETH. 1(H 

I send to you herewith Mr. Haddon' s book,* which I pray 
you procure with suerty to be published, and add some com- 
mendations of your hand where and as you thynk well. 

My Lord Robert showed me your letter sent to him by 
Barlow, and did much commend your playnnes of writing to 
him, which he confessed to be both wisely and friendly 
done, f and so I thynk surely it to be always the best way 
to deal, for though playing under the board prove sometime 
the jugglers, yet we see by proof in friendship it lasts 
not, but brings inconvenience. I have informed Mr. Comer 
of the negotiation here of a secretary of Flanders, and of 
things depending thereupon. 

I send you Haddon country Osorium. I pray you use some 
expedition for the publishing thereof, and procure some good 
body to cause it to speak French. By the next I will 
send you the copy of the obligation for the money received 
by the Admiral, wherein her Majesty would have you pro 
cure a more certain answer of the time and manner of pay- 
meant. 

llth Januarij, 1563. 

Yours very well assured, 

W. CECIL. 



* Jerome Osorio, a Portuguese, and a good writer of Latin, had 
published in that language a bitter attack on the Queen and the 
English church. It was printed in France, both in Latin and French, 
and an English version was afterwards published by an English semi- 
nary priest of Louvain. Walter Haddon wrote also in Latin an able 
answer to this book, which it was thought convenient should be 
printed in France, where Osorio's book had come out. The French 
government could not handsomely refuse the licence to print Haddon's 
book, but various pretences were used to hinder or delay it. 

f See Stripe's Life of Sir Thomas Smith, for an explanation of this 
affair. 



M 



162 DEFENCELESS STATE OF THE COAST. [JAN. 

THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO CECIL. 

Sir, for that the contrye here is in much preplexitie and 
feare, clouting what may followe of the preparation they 
heare of made by the Frenche, I thought good to write to 
your Honor privately howe small soever my skyl is in such 
causes. I trust ye will beare with that in respect of my 
zeale to my contrye. Indeed the feare ryseth upon conside- 
ration that Dover Castel, Walmer, Deale Castel, Wynborowe 
Castel, be as forsaken and unregarded for any provision, the 
contrye destitute of the Lord Warden, or of a Lyvetenant, to 
whom in suche straightes men myght resort, the people but 
feble and unarmed, and commonly discomforted. 

This daye I sent my man into Tenet to Sir Henry Crispe, 
who standeth in muche doubt: he hath understanding of 
a Frenche pynneys to have searched as far as the Temmys 
mouth to knowe how the Queene's shippes be appointed. 
He thinketh they be like to land in Shepeye, to kepe the 
Queene's shippes within the Temmys, and not to come 
forth : wherupon they may be the bolder to arrive, and if the 
contrye be not comforted, I feare that som folkes of welth will 
be removing their housholde and substance : upon which ex- 
ample more may do the lyke, but that I repose my wholl trust 
and confidence, next to God, in the Queene's Majestie's care- 
fulness and your prudent forsight towards this quarter, (I 
have no great trust in the furnyture of men, munition, or artil- 
lery), I wold ellys be carryed with mistrustes of the worste, 
as other men be most commonly. I also sent another mes- 
senger to Dover, to the Lyvetenant. The people in the town, 
as he reported, be amased, and have their hearts cold to heare 
of no preparation to ward this feared myschief, though you see 
fully all maner of procedings and can note the furdest 
sequel of them, yet in my opyriion it wer not amisse 
through some participation of advyses preceded into these 
quarters, to sprede them abrode to the staye of the people, 
for to whom to go, upon whom to staye, they knowe not. 



1564.] TREATMENT OF THE ENGLISH EXILES. 163 

We have too few justices betwixt Canterbery and Dover 
now. I wold Mr. Edward Boys were one, whom I take to be 
a honest stayed gentleman, &c. Some of our justices go to 
the term, and a few remain. 

I pray your Honour send me some information by this my 
servant, not for that I can see any ability in myself to do 
service that way, yet I could cause my neighbours to 
trust well, and cause my chaplains to comfort the people 
in their sorrows in the poor villages, and this is the 
best we can do in our skill, beseeching God to assist the 
Queene's Majestic in all your circumspections, ita mciturare 
consilia la, that peace and verity may still reign 
amongst us in our days. 

At my house at Bekesborne, the 20th of January e. 
Your Honor's assured, 

MATTHUE CANTUAR. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO CECIL. 

The Duke of Wirtemberge's gentleman, which you com- 
mended unto me, returns herewith to court again. I 
could have ben contented to have had his company 
longer, I like it so well. He was a student in the civil 
law at Strasburge when I was there, but we were not there 
acquainted; By occasion of talk, we have somewhat dif- 
feared in opinion conceminge BrentiuV* doctrine of ubi- 
quite, which he seems to approve, and not I j but so as we 
were contented one to hear another reasons, and eche to 
suffer other to abound in his own sense. The Duke of 
Wirtemberg his master gave at one time to the exiled En- 
glishe f at Strasburg three or four hundred dallars, besides 
that he gave at Frankfurt. 

* John Brentius, or Brentzen, one of the German reformers. He 
died in 1570. 
t The refugees in Mary's reign. 

if 2 



164 FOX THE MARTYROLOGIST. [.IAN. 

If ye thinke it convenient I wolde wishe ye moved the 
Queene's Majestic to make some signification to the bringer 
that her Highnesse hath hearde thereof, that it may appeare 
his liberalitie is not altogether buried in oblivion, or only if 
some remembrance thereof passe from your mouthe, it might 
do goode. Godde kepe you. 

From Fulham,* 24 Januarij, 1563. 

Yours in Christe, 

EDM. LONDON. 



THE BISHOP OF NORWICH TO JOHN FOX.* 

Salutem in Christo Jesu. I have receyved your loving 
letters, and do understand therby your visitation at Godde's 
hand in this tyme of mortalytie ; you are not ignorant that so 
he is wont to chastise whom he loveth. As touching the 
prebend, what I with other your frends have done in that 
behalf, I am sure you have heard, howbeit the successe is not 
suche as we hoped at Mr. Foule's hands ; but ther is one Mr. 
Smith, in Cambridge, that hathe another of the prebends, 
who, as I heare, can be content to parte from the same uppon 
reasonable conditions. 

Good Mr. Foxe, appointe you to come downe as soone as 
convenientlie you may, and doubt you not God wyll provyde 
for you either that or some other thing as good, whereunto 
there shall want nothing in me that I am able to do. 

And thus with my hartie commendations to my good 

* Where the Bishop of London has still a palace, the gardens of which 
owe much of their beauty to Bishop Grindal. He was a great pro- 
moter of botany, and is said to have first imported the tamarisk tree. 

t The celebrated John Fox, the martyrologist. During Mary's 
reign he had taken shelter on the continent, where he had contracted 
a close friendship with Parkhurst. He was now waiting for some pre- 
ferment in the church, and particularly desired a prebend of Norwich 
for the sake of living near his friend. He was some time after made 
Prebend of Salisbury. 



1564.] FOX THE MARTYROLOGIST. 165 

friends with you, I commit you to the keeping of Al- 
mighty God. 

From Ludham,* this 29th of January, 1563. 
Your assured friend, 

JOHN NORWIC. 

My Lord Deane of Christ's Church was appointed by the 
Duke's counsel to preach at the burial of the Dutch, f 
The which thing he had done, if I had not sent my letters 
to them, offering my service in this behalf, for although the 
other could do much better than I, yet I thought it my 
bounden duty to do all things that T might to Godde's glory 
to do honour to the Duke's grace. 

Therefore the Deane buried her, and I made the funeral 
sermon, 24 Januarij. All things were done honourably, 
sine crux, sine lux, at non sine tinkling. There was nei- 
there torch, neither taper, candle, nor any light else besides 
light of the sun. Singing there was enough. I have sent 
to you here enclosed a letter, written to me from Dr. Gesner, % 
and two catalogos. The one for you, to search by that the 
Queue's library, according to Dr. Gesner's request, and to 
ask of other learned men concerning the same. 

The other I pray you send to Dr. Simpson or Dr. Hum- 
phrys, that search may be made in Oxford also. 

One I have sent to Mr. Beaumont, || in Cambridge, that he 
may do the like. 

I wold rather be negligent in other things, then in setting 
forth old ancient writers ; and yet to say the truth to you, 
I like no old writer worse then Dionysius, the which, al- 

* Ludham, a village about ten miles from Norwich. 

t Of Norfolk. 

Conrad Gesner, the famous naturalist, born at Zurich, in 1516, and 
died in 1565. 

Thomas Simpson, Dean of Christ Church : and Lawrence Hum- 
phrey, President of Magdalene College. 

|| Dr. Robert Beaumont, Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. 



166 FOX THE MARTYROLOGIST. [JAN. 

though he be somewhat ancient, yet I am persuaded that it 
is not Areopagita ille de quo Act. 1 7. 

I pray you certifie me of these thinges as sone as you maye, 
and if a bloodhound or twayne might be sent to Zurich, 
according to Dr. Gesner's requeste, I wold rejoyce not a 
little, and wold be contente to pay for the charges thereof. 
I wryte this unto you, because you be so good a hunter, and 
have suche plentie of dogges, &c. 

I praye you when you have perused Dr. Gesner's letters, 
that you will send them againe forthe to me, that I may 
make answer to the same against the nexte carte. 

Commende me to Mrs. Fox, to Mr. Day* and his wyfe, 
and thanke him for the boke of the Reliques of Rome which 
he sent me. I will thanke Mr. Becon, f which dedicated the 
same to my name, another time, if God so will. Yf you see 
the Bishop of London, the Deane of Paul's, Mr. Whitehedd, 
and other of my trends there, I praye you salute them in my 
name. 

Yours, 

JOHN NORWIC. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO CECIL. 

Mr. Calfhill this morning shewed me your letter to him, 
wherein you wishe some politick orders to be devised against 
infection. I thinke it verie necessarie, and will do myne 
endeavor bothe by exhortation and otherwise. I was readye 
to crave your helpe for the same purpose afore, as one not 
unmindefull of the perill. By searche I do perceive that 
there is no one thinge of late is more lyke to have renewed 

* Day the printrr. 

t Thomas Becon, a zealous English reformer, who died about 1570, 
He was a voluminous writer, and published books so early as 1541. 
The book here referred to is the " Reliques of Rome," printed by Day 
in 16mo. in 1563. In the folio of Becon's works, printed in 1564, is a 
Latin epigram in his praise, by Bishop Parkhurst. 



1564.] BP. GKINDAL AGAINST PLAYERS. 167 

this contagion, then the practise of an idle sort of people 
which have ben infamous in all good common-weals, I 
mean these histrionic, common players, who now daily, 
but specially on holidays, set up booths w r hereunto the 
youth resorts excessively, and there takes infection : 
besides that Godde's word is by their impure mouths 
profaned and turned into scoffs. For remedy w r hereof in my 
judgement ye should do very well to be a mean, that a procla- 
motion was set fortheto inhibit allplayes for one whole year 
(and if it were for ever, it were not amiss) within the city, 
or three miles compass, upon pains as well to the players 
as to the owners of the houses where they play these in- 
terludes. 

T wrote to Mr. Dr. Humfrey, of Oxford, to keep the day 
appointed him by my Lord of Rochester, which he will ob- 
serve, I doubt not. 

As I counselled Mr. Calfhillto know your pleasure for his 
repair to court, so I shall pray you to let me under 
stand your advise for mine own case concerning my ser- 
mon, whether I remaining here may be admitted, and the 
like for my chaplain, Mr. Wattes 

I was compelled to remove hither, both for the better dis- 
charge of mine office, and also for that I was destitute of ne- 
cessarie provision at Fulham. 

Yet I thought then, the city would have been clean 
ere now. God keep you. 

From my hows atPowles, 22 Fibre. 1563. 

Yours in Christ, 

EDM. LONDON 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

I am right sorry that these incident matters of the rebel 
lion of the O'Mores are drawn for argument to prolong your 
coming from thence. 



168 MEASURES AGAINST PIRACY. [MARCH, 

I assure your Lordshipp ther lacked no good will in your 
trend* for your particular interest to procure you spedy return 
thence. But you may see it hath not bene thought mete neither 
by her Majesty, nor by her whole counsell,that untill the ende 
of that rebellion be scene, you should come thence. And 
therfor your Lordshipp must arm yourself with contentation, 
and remedy it when tyme shall better serve. 

My Lord, this matter of resort of pyratts,* or if ye will so 
call them, our adventurers, that dayly robb the Spaniards and 
Flemings, and make port sayle in that realme, is a matter of 

* It is inconceivable at the present day what destructive depreda- 
tions were committed at this period on the shipping of other powers 
by the English under the colour of voyages of discovery and mercan- 
tile adventure. The continual necessity under which the government 
lay of giving orders of reprisal on the French or the Spaniards, rendered 
it impossible to put a stop to such depredations, and in spite of their 
complaints, when they found themselves to be the greatest sufferers, 
it cannot be denied that the foreign powers, and particularly the 
Spaniards, had been the first and chief provokers of them. A voyage 
to America was little better than a piratical expedition, and the 
Drakes, and the Raleighs, and, in fact, many of the nobles of that 
time, were in reality but free-booters on the sea : yet it is to these 
truly gallant men that we owe the foundation of our naval superiority. 
The following story is told in a curious book of jests printed in the 
reign of James I. " An Earle, in times past in this kingdome, having 
made some prosperous voyages abroad, and returning with great 
prizes from the Spaniard, meeting with another yong Earle, who by 
his father's death was newly come both to his meanes and title ; after 
some noble congratulation, they fell in discourse of divers sea-fights, 
and ships taken from the enemy. At length, " I wonder," saith the 
soldier, "Earle, that your Lordship being of such remarke in the court 
and kingdome, doth not for your greater honour undertake in your 
owne person some noble enterprise at sea against the common enemy 
the Spaniard, as I and others have done.'' To whom hee gave this 
modest answer : " My worthy lord ; I thank God, my father was so 
carefull, that hee hath husbanded so my present meanes and fortunes, 
that I am able to live of mine owne revenues at home, without any 
need to goe theeving abroad." "Why, my Lord," saith hee, "doe you 
hold mee to be a theefe?" "Oh! yes, with pardon, my Lord, an 
honourable theefe." 



1564.] CONDUCT OF THE PURITANS. 169 

a great long consequence. For God's sake I require you em- 
ploy some care therein, that some might be apprehended and 
executed. And thereof your Lordship shall get more 
praise than you perchance thynk of, for suerly evil tongues 
are bold to slander your Lordship for your toleration thereof, 
wherein I dare say they do foully report you. 

The name of Fetyplace is also odious, and I fear the 
grace bestowed at your Lordshipp's request will not prove 
well bestowed. 

From Windsor, the 3rd of March, 1563. 

Your Lordshipp's humble at command, 

W. CECIL. 



THE BISHOP OF BATH AND WELLS* TO CECIL. 
It may please your Honour to be advertised, that I am much 
encombered with Mr. Doctor Turner, Deane of Wells, for his 
un discrete behaviour in the pulpit : where he medleth with all 
matters, and unseemly speaks of all estates, more then is 
standing with discretion. I have advertised him by 
writings, and have admonished secretly by his own friends ; 
notwithstanding he persisted still in his folly. He con- 
temneth utterly all Bishopps,t and calls them white 
coats, typpett gentlemen, with other words of reproach 
much more unseemly, and asks, who gave them authority 
more over me, then I over them : either toforbidd me preach 
ing, or to deprive me ; unless they have it from their holy 
father the Pope. I have advertised my Lord of Canterbury of 
his doings, from whom as yet I have heard no answer. If 
I might in treat your Honour to write three or four lines to 

* Gilbert Berkley, made Bishop of Bath and Wells in 1560. He 
died in 1582. 

t The puritans, who would have had the reformation carried much 
further, began now to make a great stir throughout the country. 
They were the more troublesome, by reason that many of them were 
bcneficed, and had possession of the pulpit, as in the present instance 
of Dean Turner. 



170 NICHOLAS POINTS. [MARCH, 

the said Deane, I know it would staie his undiscrete do- 
yngs. Your Honor should do him a good turne, and bynde 
me, as I acknowledge myself alreadie most bounden, to praie 
for your Honor's prosperitie during life. 
At Taunton, this 23rd of Marche, 1563. 

Your Honor's dailie orator, 

GILB. BATHE AND WELLS. 



N. POYNTZ TO SIR WILLIAM CECIL. 

Right Honorable, if the greatest comforte that ever was 
shewed to a poore subject, might have heled my mother's 
broken hearte, it had been the Queue's Majesty's most loving 
and honorable letters, wryten unto her, and delivered the 21 
day of Marche, by Santon, the messenger, with thirty pounds 
to buy her apotecary stuffe, wherof she had great nede, if 
others had not better considered of their duties, then her hus- 
band of his office. Assuredly, Sir, he is no man, but such a 
monster, as the like strange nature I judge to be in no beaste,but 
at this tyme to fill this paper with his unkinde dealings with 
my mother, I shuld bothe shewe my leasure to be more then 
indede it is, and your opinion of me to be no better than I 
have deserved ; yet though, by some of my doings which 
were committed for lacke of discretion, I have, I confess, 
justly deserved the Queue's Majesty's hevy displeasure, and 
therfore to be littell credyted ; it shall not be provyd that 
Dyar is able to cleare himselfe of nauty and uncivel be- 
haviour upon my unfortunate mother, and withoute deserte. 
And though there be no lawe provyded for such fine murders, 
yet am I most assured there is layd up a law in the consciense 
of the Queue's Majesty, whiche I truste wyll apeare. Your 
gentill and lovyng letter also she receaved most thankfully. 
In what case Santon found her he wyll reporte, and wyll 
aifirme that the hearing of those letters only gave her presently 
perfect syght, perfect hearing, and a plane voyce, which 
continued with her untyll her breathe fayled ; and apointed 



1564.] THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 171 

in what order her Majesty's letters and yours should be 
answered, and after she had put her hand to them, and with 
her own hands kissed and delivered those letters, she presently 
dyed, with memory, speech, sight, and hearing, perfect 
until the last hour. Her soul, I trust, is in heaven, and 
the reward at God's hands for your gentylnes, I trust, shall 
be great. 

From Wells, the 23rd of March. 

Your most bounden, 

N. POINTS. 



LORD ROBERT DUDLEY TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Albeit, the Quene's Majesty was very loath to have had, 
my Lord, your Lordship come thence before the country had 
been somewhat better stably shed; yet consy dering the danger 
your Lordship hath been sundry times of late in by sick 
nes, and the small hope you have of any recovery in that 
place, she hath chiefly for that respect granted license for 
your Lordshipp's repair home, as you may farther perceive 
by her Highness letters presently unto you. Of other matters 
or news here, this berer can sufficiently inform your Lord 
ship, therefore I will leave longer to trouble you at this 
time, but commend your Lordship to the favour of God, who 
send you present health and well to do. 

From Windsor, this 23rd day of April, 1564. 
Your Lordshipp's assured friend, 

R. DUDDELEY- 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Mr. Comer and Malvaser came to Windsor the 20th of 
this month, and the treaty * must take place the 23rd, which 

* With France. 



17'2 CONCLUSION OF PEACE WITH FRANCE. [APRIL, 

was a very short tyme to procure knowledg to our western 
sea coasts, or to Ireland, but what could be done in such a case 
was expedited. It was proclaymed in London the 22nd, and on 
the 23rd a notable good sermon made at Pooles,* with Te Deum 
and all incident solemnities. The same daye it was published 
at Wyndsor, in the Queue's Majestie's presence going to the 
church, having with her Majesty the French ambassador, 
so as nothyng wanted to shew contentation, and yet her Ma- 
jesty, inwardly to me and other her counsellors, showed much 
mislykyng, specially, as I guess, because the money was no 
more, for honor's sake. 

On that daye the French Kyng was chosen of the Order, f 
and -so was the Erie of Bedford, and Sir Henry Sydney. I 
thynk my Lord of Hunsdon shall bryng the order into 
France, and so shall have commission to require the oathe 
joyntly with you. 

The treaties are in new wrytyng and engrossyng, to be here 
ratifyed. Wherin all the hast is made that can be, because 
Mr. Throgmorton's return dependeth theruppon. 

The hostages wer put to liberty the 23rd, at Wyndsor, where 
her Majesty challenged Nantoillett for his practises in Ox- 
ford, provokyng evill subjects to be worse in Popery. But 
her Majesty concluded that she wold wrapp up all such with 
oblivion because of peace. As soon as I can possibly, I will 
procure the ratification to be sent thither, for I trust to have 
it sygned and sealed before to-morrow at night. 

Malvasyr hath a chayne way ing three score and 

ounces of gold : he hath bene well used here. I thank you for 
sendyng to me some of Mr. Haddon's books, for he thought 
me negligent therof, but now he is satisfyed. 

Here is fallen out a troublesome fond matter. John Hales! 

* St. Pauls. f Of the garter. 

J John Hales, clerk of the Hanaper. The title of the book was, 
" A Declaration of the Succession of the Crowne Imperiall of England." 
His object was to throw aside the Scottish line, and to support the 
legality of the marriage of Lady Catherine Grey, whose son, in this 



1564.] HALES ON THE SUCCESSION. 173 

had secretly made a book in the time of the last parlcment, 
wherein he hath taken upon him to discuss no small matter, 
viz. the title to this crown, after the Queue's Majesty, having 
confuted and rejected the lyne of the Scottish Queen, and 
made the lyne of the Lady Francesce, mother to the Lady 
Catherine, only next and lawful. He is committed to the Flete 
for this boldness, specially because he hath communicated 
it to sundry persons. My Lord John Grey is in trouble also 
for it. Beside this, John Hales hath procured sentences and 
counsels of lawyers from beyond seas to be written inmayn- 
tenance of the Erie of Hertford's marriadg. 

This dealing of his offends the Quene's Majesty very 
much. God give her Majesty by this chance a disposition to 
consider hereof, that either by her mariadg, or by some com- 
mon order, we poor subjects may know where to lean and 
adventure our lives with contentation of our consciences. 

At the writing hereof I am here at Westminster, attending 
of that mine office in the wards, and so pestered with busynes 
as I am forced to make this letter serve both to Sir Nicholas 
Throgmorton and you. 27th April, 1564. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 

Young Sadler shall come thytherward as soon as the 
treaty can be ratified and delivered to the ambassador. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, my fortune is of all others worse. By this peace you 
and other ministers take some rest, but this being come, I 
have no less business. And unfortunately is here happened 
a troublesome chance, occasioned by John Hales, who is 

case, would be next heir to the crown. The people of England were 
generally in favour of this mode of settling the succession. 



174 HALES COMMITTED TO THE FLEET. [MAY, 

found to have first made and procured books in defence of the 
Erie of Hertford's marriage, and likewise in approbation of 
the title of the succession for the Lady Catharine. 

In which matter he hath so delt, as both hymself and 
others are lyke to fynd trouble therof. He is in the Flete and 
lyke to go to the Tower. The Earl of Hertford is with Mr. 
Mason, the Lord John * is here in custody. 

And in this matter I am by commandment occupyed, 
wherof I could be content to be delivered : but I will goo up- 
right, neither ad dextram nor ad sinistram. And yet am I 
not free from suspicion, by occasion that some of these hath 
had access to me in their sutes. 

Now, Sir, for your matters. As you required me, so did 
I impart to my Lord Robert, the differences that happened 
betwixt you and Sir Nicholas ; and I caused Mr. Somer to 
report his knowledg, which surely made more for you than 
your owne wryting. But I wish such matters swallowed up 
into forgetfulness. 

By the Queue's Majesty's letters you shall perceave what 
her Majesty wold have you do. And therfore I will not 
more trouble you therin, but wish you some good answer, for 
the money due by the Prince of Condee. 

I pray you, if you can, help me to a ryder, for therof have I 
grete nede. My wife thanketh you for your present of her 
sieves. The 1st of May, 1564. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, the distance of you from hence, breedeth annoyance 
both to you and us here, for therby happeneth a certain 
strangeness that neither of us heare of the other ; and therfore 
it happeneth not amiss, that we have no great matters to treate 

* Lord John Grey. 



1564.] FOREIGN TRADE. 175 

I 

of with you. This whereof her Majestic writes, is the most 
troublesome that hath chanced since the peace was made, 
wherein the French ambassador is very ernest, and yet he 
pretends, that he is thereto provoked by the merchants 
particular suits and by direction from the King; and therefore 
he says he could be content that you there might obtain from 
the King there some commandment to him that he should 
fobeare this matter of proceeding with us, to exact by the 
treaty, that although we have and do forbid both our own 
merchants and those of the Low Country the trade of the Low 
Contreys, yet the French might now enter into the trade. Wher- 
in they never did hertofore meddle, but now partly to pleasure 
them of the Low Country, partly or chiefly to procure again 
by monopoly, they wold exercise that negotiation. We 
here do see it very necessary to return to the Low Con- 
trey : for although it w^ere to great purpose to divert some 
part of our trade from thence, and is scene possible, yet the mat- 
la was not so forseene, considering it fell out upon a casu- 
alty, but that our country shall not be presently able to en- 
dure the holding out. One of our greatest letts is the lack 
of the revenue for the Queen of the custom ; the second is the 
sudden stay at home of the people that belong to cloth-make 
ing. But herein I will not trouble you, for it hath many 
parts to be considered. And presently now upon the 
Queue's Majestie's return to Westminster, I thynk we shall 
come to some conclusion with the Spanish ambassador, who 
began well, at our entry into the progress, * and hath for- 
born until now that he renews the matter again, and re- 
quires a new communication. 

Upon the death of the Emperor, the Queen intends to 
send some person thither to condole and congratulate. If 
you shall hear the reports that begin to be whispered in the 
Queue's privy chamber, and know no more, you will make 
sundry consequences. As they be you shall have them. 

* In the course of this progress, Elizabeth had visited Cambridge. 



17() CONDOLENCE FOR DEATH OF THE EMPEROR. [SEPT. 



Some saye Sir H. Sydney shall go; moo say that Sir Nicholas 
Throkmorton; some saye that Sir Nicholas and I shall go 
together ; a fewe saye that Sir Nicholas Throkmorton and my 
Lord Robert shall go ; but what shall be I thynk nobody yet 
knoweth ; but to tell you truth, there is more ment then condo- 
lence or congratulation, it may be an intention for themariage 
with the archduke. * This may be very strange, and therfore 
I pray you kepe this very close, for so is it necessary; and 
wer it not that you should be troubled with guessing many 
ways, I wold not have wrytten. 

You may percase heare that thynges are not sound betwixt 
my Lord Robert and me, but surely all is well, and so I take 
myself assured, although either of us do understand well 
ynough, how busy many be to move the contrary. I must con- 
fess myself to be much beholden to his Lordship, and for my 
part I do endeavor myself in good ernestnes to merit well of 
hym. Our parlement is prorogued till Easter, wherof now I 
thynk is somewhat sorry. 

From Syon,the 12th of September, 1564. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, this evening I came to my howse here by the Savoy, 
for necessary business, and being redy to go to my bed, my 
clerk attendyng at the court sent me this letter here included, 
according wherunto I do wryte to note fault in you that you 
have not advertised who is sent as ambassador for the French 
to the Emperor Maximilian. Nevertheless I meane to-mor- 
row to show her Majestic that which I thynk reasonable to 
excuse you ; for at your last writing when Barloo cam, which 
was in August, I thynk none was appoynted, and to send a 
messenger expressly with that matter I thynk her Majestic 
wold not allow it. I see by this letter that Sir Nicholas 

Part of this sentence is in cypher. 



1564.] EXEQUIES OF THE EMPEROR. 177 

Throgmorton hath had some conference with her Majesty 
for the embassade to the Emperor, which at this present stand 
eth thus. For my sickness, and the affairs at home, am ex- 
cussed. Sir Nicholas will go with none but with me. And 
then is Sir H. Sydney to be named, who being in Wales, will 
spend long time before he can be ready. So as the time being 
already so far spent, I thynk best to stay the ambassade of 
condoling ; and to send herafter to congratulate the corona 
tion. In the mean time the Quene's Majesty hath been at 
greatchardges with the exequies for the Emperor, which began 
on Monday, and ended yesterday. The morners were the 
Lord Treasurer, Earls of Sussex and Huntington, Lords 
Strange, Darly, Herbert, Lumley, Hunsdon, Mr. Comtrol- 
ler, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, myself, Mr. Sackfeld, and Mr. 
Throgmorton. The Bishop of London made so good and 
dicrete a sermon, as it shall be printed in English and Latin. 

The matter which the Rhyngrave dealt with you would be 
very seasonable if it were honourably propounded. Sapience 
panca. 

My Lord Robert is made Erie of Leicester, * and his pre- 
ferment in Scotland is earnestly intended. From my hows 
next Savoy. 4 October. 1564. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 

We be yet at no end with the Flamings. 



SIR THOMAS CHALONER TO THE QUEEN. 

(30 November, 1564. Abstract.) 

Desirous to be recalled. The talk of the King and 
Prince's going into Flandres uncertain, the wisest men and 
so himself hold he will go never. His advice touching the 

* Lord Robert Dudley was created Earl of Leicester on Michaelmas 
Day, 1564. 

VOL. I. N 



178 TREATY WITH FLANDERS, [NOV. 

trade into Flandrcs, that some other places then only Ant- 
warp might be appointed for the utterance of her subject's 
wares, the Kinge having so at any falling out a great advan- 
tage over the English. He is of opinion that corne and beer 
would be a gainefull merchandise, being rented as the cloths, 
and yet not so dangerous ; that ploughing might be main- 
tained, and some order taken agaynst the making of pasture 
groundes. Complaines against piracies committed by the 
English ; is of opinion it were better to abstaine for a while 
from the Indian voyages, * being but the desire and gaine of 
three or four men, then still to continue, and so give cause 
of breach of amity between us and the King of Spaine. He 
doubts not in time his navigation will be as open to the En- 
glish as any other elles. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, the distance of that court from hence bredeth much 
greef -both to me and yow, for therby we both fynd the lack 
of conference. And now the French ambassador giveth me 
not warning, but uppon the sudden sendyng his man for my 
letters if I will send any, and therefore they must be .hasty, 
sudden, and patched letters, as almost I am compelled to do 
all my private thynges. I meane within a fewe dayes to return 
Barlow to you, whom I staye untill I may see our entercourse 
come to some lykehoode of good end. 

I send you the articles wheruppon the Spanish ambassador 
and we are agreed, which he sent seven dayes past to the Duch- 
ess of Parma ; and uppori return of her answer we shall know 
what will take place. They have already allowed the articles, 

* The Spaniards and Portuguese, by old authority of the Pope, 
claimed the sole right of making these voyages. But both the English 
and French adventurers fitted out ships to trade there, and in time of 
profound peace at home, these two latter nations carried on in America 
and India a most destructive warfare against the navies of the two 
other powers. 



1564.] DEATH OF LORD JOHN GREY. 179 

saving that we here have added two points, the one that the 
intercourse should oppen before the treaty, the other that it 
should continue after for a time. They will have the Diet and 
the intercourse oppen at one day. We begin to find that 
our commodities will be well enough uttered, though the in- 
tercourse should not be open for the Low Countries, for we 
find the strangers ready to carry all our clothes, but thereby 
our own merchants should perish. 

At this present I thynk my Lord of Murray and Leading 
ton are upon the frontier treating friendly with our wardens 
for border matters ; but that is I thynk a cloak to deal upon 
another matter, that is to commune of a marriage between 
the Queen of Scots and Leicester, which I thynk will not 
succeed.* As I wrote to you since Barlow came hythcr, 

no marriage is more likely to succeed then if it 

might come from thence to be honourably motioned. 

When Mr. Sadler came with your letters, he brought word 
that the Rhyngrave was on his way hither with the ordre 
for my Lord of Leicester ; but I thynk the letters sent you 
for that matter, being not arrived when Sadler came from 
thence, hath stayed that matter. 

The Queen's Majesty contynueth her displeasure towards 
John Hales, - for his foolish attempt in writing the book so 
precisely against the Queen of Scotland's title, who remain 
eth in the Tower, now in some danger by a palsy. My 
Lord Keeper f also is kept from the court, and from inter- 
medlyng with any other thing but with the Chancery, whereof 
surely the affairs take great harm, and he himself is not 
void of peril by heaviness of mind. My Lord John 
Gray died five days past, at Pyrgoo, of whom his friends 

* Part of this sentence is in cipher. The proposition of this marriage, 
we know from letters of Randolph and Bedford, printed imperfectly 
in Keith, was debated at the meeting at Berwick. 

t Sir Nicholas Bacon, who was charged with being implicated in 
the affair of John Hales. 

N -2 



180 EARL OF ARUNDEL IMPRISONED. [NOV. 

report that he dyed also of thought, but his gout was suf- 
ficient to have ended his life. 

My Lord of Arundell* remayneth as prisoner in his howse. 
His offence was that being miscontented with sondry thynges, 
as he sayd, of interruptions in his office, he surrendered his 
staff with sundry speeches of offence to the Queen's Majesty, 
wherof I thynk surely he was afterward sorry ; but I wish 
he had better thought therof before. 

Since his committyng he hath newly offended by usyng 
his house too openly for resort of strangers to hym. He now 
useth his imprisonment circumspectly, and maketh all meanes 
to crave favor, but such sutes are heard slowly, because he 
doth not knowledg himself a fawlter. And thus I end, having 
no great matter of more worth that I will wryte untyll Barlow 
shall come. I have bene also noted a favorer of my Lady 
Catharine's title, but my truth therin is tryed, and so I rest 
quiet, for surely I am and allways have bene circumspect to 
do nothyng to make offence. The Erie remayneth with Mr. 
Mason, and my Lady Catharine with Mr. Petre. 

From St. James, the 26 of Novembr. 1564. 
Your assured, 

W. CECILL. 






I thank you for my book sent by Sadler. A gentilman of 
Portugall hath bene here to sollicite a prohibition for our 
shipps not to sayle to the Mina ; but he answered with good 
words, as others have bene. 

* Henry Fitz-Allan, eighteenth Earl of Arundel He was in high 
favour during the reigns of Henry the Eighth and of Mary. He was 
Lord High Steward in the beginning of Elizabeth's reign. The cause 
of his discontent is said to have been the disappointment of his hopes 
in aspiring to the hand of the Queen. 



1564.] THE QUEEN'S SICKNESS. 181 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, As by my last I wrote that I wold very shortly send 
your servant Barloo, so now as soon as the Spanish ambas- 
sador shall have audience, which shall be on Monday, I 
will advertise you the certenty of our intercourse opened. 

The Quene's Majesty fell perilously sick on Saturday last. 
The accident cam to that which they call diarrhrea. We 
feared a flux. She is somewhat weakened, but in health, and 
will attend to her affairs after Saturday, which is to-morrow. 
Assure you she is clearly whole, but for the time she made us 
sore afraid. Thanked be God for both ! for of both we take 
good, warned by her sickness, and comforted by her re- 
covery. 

The French ambassador shall have his answer to-morrow, 
or on Sunday, concerning the Quene's Majesty's acceptance 
of the King's offer for the two rooms of his ordre. By Bar- 
low ye shall know what. And so I end, the 15th of De- 
comb. 1564. 

I never omytt writing to you when I may. The berer is 
the Bishop of Glasguoo's* brother. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, According to my promise I do send to you Barloo 
your servant. 

Yesterday being Sunday, the Spanish ambassador pre- 
scented to her Majesty a writing, signed with the hand of the 
Duchess of Parma, whereof I do send you the copy, and this 

* James Beacon, who was made Bishop of Glasgow in 1551, and in 
1560, terrified by the proceedings of the reformers, retired to France, 
where he remained in the character of ambassador of Mary and her 
son and successor James. He did not die till 1603. 



182 TRADE WITH FLANDERS. [DEC. 

day he shall receave the lyke from her Majesty, so as by cal- 
culation the intercourse shall be made oppen on New Yere's 
Day, and our commissioners must be redy at the sea syde 
about the 26th of January. I thynk my Lord of Sussex shall 
be chieff, Dr. Wotton the second, and Mr. Haddon the 
third. Great sute is made by them of Brudges l to have our 
merchants to kepe their fayres there. The Comte of Egmond 
hath sent and wrytten hyther for that purpose, and our mer- 
chants uppon a stomack agaynst Antwarp, are well disposed 
to Bruges. The haven is also now made and will serve very 
well. What will follow I know not. The trade to Emden 
shall not be forsaken, but continued, ni forte Romani, fyc. 

On Saturday the French ambassador was here with the 
Queen's Majesty, who delt in two principall matters, the one 
to know her pleasur for the offers made by the King his master 
to choose my Lord of Leicester and any other to be named 
by her Majesty to be of his order. Wherunto her Majesty 
did resolve to have my Lord of Leicester to be chosen ; but 
for the second place she wold hereafter advise to the King 
her pleasure. 

The second matter was to know her pleasure in his former 
sutes made, that the French King's subjects might resort 
with commodities from the King of Spayne's Low Contries 
hither. Wherin above ten dayes past he had a long debate 
with the counsell, and wold not be therin satisfied, although 
we shewed hym what you had wrytten, and you found the 
King and his counsell satisfied with your answers made. 
But now we had a very ready answer for hym, that was be- 
cause we had not prohibited the French but for a season, 
duryng these differences with Flanders, we being now at 
an accord with them, he should see that liberty should be 
gyven shortly to all persons, and then the French might use 
theire pleasure. This knowledg given hym of our accord, 
seined to answer hym fully, and he sayd that he was therof 
1 ully gladd. 

1 Bruges. 



1564.] MARY OF SCOTLAND AND LEICESTER. 187 

Now whylcst i am writing, I understand that mcancs is 
made that Sir Nicholas Throkmorton might go to the French 
ambassador with report that upon instance made by my 
Lord of Leicester her Majesty will name my Lord of Sussex 
for the second person, and so until I hear more I do for- 
bear writing thereof. In Scotland there hath been a parley 
mcnt, wherein nothing is done unto the restitution of the 
Krle of Lennox ; as for my Ladye's claim to Angush, by 
reason of the greatness of the Erie Morton, being chancellor, 
nothing is attempted. The Erie of Lennox' friends wish 
that the Lord of Darly might marry with the Scottish 
Queen, and I see some devise to bring the Queen's Ma- 
jesty not only to allow thereof, but also to move it to the 
Queen her sister. But I see no disposition thereto in her Ma- 
jesty, but she rather contynueth her desire to have my 
Lord of Leicester preferred that way, for which purpose 
there was this last month a metying at Barwyke with my 
Lord of Murray and the Lord of Ledington, but yet co- 
veered with some other matters. And now of late it is from 
thence renewed, to know with what conditions the Queen's 
Majesty will prefer him, wherein at this present no full an- 
swer is yet given ; but to say the truth of my knowledge in 
these fickle matters, I can affirm nothing that I can assure 
to continue. 

I see the Queen's Majesty very desirous to have my Lord 
of Leicester placed in this high degree to be the Scottish 
Queen's husband; but when it comes to the conditions 
which are demanded, I see her then remiss of her ernest- 
nes.* 

This also I see in the Queen's Majesty, a sufficient con- 

* By the letters which I have examined, I cannot but think that in 
this negotiation about the Earl of Leicester, the Scottish Queen acted 
with great duplicity, and that, although she let the negotiation run on 
for a long time, she was resolved from the first not to have him. Her 
conduct seems to have been intended as a cover for her proceedings 
with respect to Darnley, who was obnoxious to almost every boly. 



184 FOREIGN AFFAIRS. [DEC. 

tentation to be moved to marry abroad, and if it so may please 
Almighty God, to leade by the hand some mete person to 
come and lay hand on her to her contentation, I could then 
wish myself more helth to endure my yeres somewhat longer 
to enjoy e such a world here, as I trust will follow, other- 
wise I assure you, as now thynges hang in desperation, I 
have no comfort to lyve. I thought to have heard somewhat 
from you, uppon the watchword you gave me in your letter, 
that I should heare more by another waye. To-morrow the 
proclamation shall be made for the oppening of the inter- 
course, but I feare this frost will so shut it upp, as no 
shipp shall pass or repass. 

This daye* the proclamation is made. The Queen's 
Majesty is now fully recovered of her cold, and cometh abrode, 
and will sign the letters long agon made to you, and the 
letter to the French King, which hath bene also altered, 
but as it is now I send the copy of it to you. 

To-morrow the Spanish ambassador meaneth to feast 
us here, who hath bene long in begynning so to do, having 
example sufficient by the French ambassador, who hath very 
often of late invited my Lord of Leicester, and such as have 
accompanyed hym. It is strange to see what great amity 
is now betwixt the French ambassador and Mr. Throk- 
morton, consideryng the hate that Mr. Throkmorton hath 
born hym. 

Th'ambassador looketh to be revoqued in March next, and 
to be afterward sent into Spayne. 

My Lord of Bedford wryteth that he is moved indirectly to 
recompence the Erie of Murray with goyng to Edenburgh, 
and so I thynk he shall be licensed. Such toyes may breed 
jelousies herafter. 

The Queen's displesure contynueth still towards my Lord 
of Hertford and the Lady Catharyne, and my Lord Keper 

* The letter was written at twice- what precedes this sentence on 
the l ^9th of December. 



1564.] RECALL OF SIR THOMAS CHALONER. 185 

remains yet as he did, absent from court. My Lord of 
Arundell is now at liberty to go and to be visited by whom 
lie will, but yet he cannot come to her Majesty's presence, 
although lie is in some hope so to do shortly. John Hales 
remains still in prison. 

Sir Thomas Challoner's servant is newly come hither, with 
no matter of moment, but to procure his coming home, which 
was accorded twelve months past. But the same hath been 
prolonged hitherto upon the differences risen from the staye 
of intercourse, and now those being come to some calm, he 
shall be called home, and leave a secretary behind him until 
one may be procured to go thither, which we find hard to 
do, principally for the difference of religion, or else Mr. H. 
Knolls should go ; but I thynk we shall send Mr. John 
Hastings, or some such like, if we cannot find out a person 
of better estate.* 

If we might, we could be content to have our ambassador 
resident in the Low Gentries, and none in Spain, for there no 
thing is negotiated at all. 

Mr. Challoner writes strangely of the ringing of a bell in 
Mellila in Are gone, without knowledge by whom, but of itself : 
I dowt not but you here of it by Monsieur de Meru. 

The rest of things that I do not write I will commune 
cate to your servant, and so take my leave for this year, 
meaning to do my uttermost in the entry of this next year, 
to procure your return, as reason is. The 30th of December, 
1564. Yours assured for ever, 

W. CECIL. 

* Sir Thomas Chaloner did not live many months after his recall. He 
died on the 15th of October, 1565. Sir Thomas was one of Cecil's 
oldest and most esteemed friends, arid was distinguished equally as a 
soldier, a statesman, and a scholar. " He obtained his recall by an 
elegy to Elizabeth, after the manner of Ovid, and towards the end of 
1564, published the first five books of his ( Right Ordering of the En- 
glish Republic;' a work which he had written to occupy and amuse 
the dull hours of his Spanish ministry, and which he dedicated to his 
old and good friend Sir William Cecil." Narcs. 



186 MAUY OF SCOTLAND AND LEICESTER. [FE13. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER.* 

I have the longer forborne to write unto your Lordship, for 
ibarc least that my last letters deserved soe little thankes, that 
your Lordship careth not how few come into your handes. 
Whatsoever is contayned in my writings, my mynde was 
never to offend, and if T knew which way to sort to your 
Lordship's contentment, with the desire I have that this suite 
I have here tooke effect, your Lordship should ever be voyd 
of suspicion of my good will. That matter which I have in 
hand, I am assured, if it take effect, shall turne your Lordship 
to the greatest honor that you can be called unto, except you 
marrye with the Queue's Majesty. What proffit and comodity 
shall ensue unto your country, the wisest and best experi- 
mented have already given theyr judgment, that there can be 
no greater. The Queue's Majesty's contentment herein I am 
sure will be such, as this being ended her great care is past. 
Because your Lordship therefore shall not be ignorant to 
what pass matters are come unto here, that your Lordship 

* It is evident that the Queen of Scots made the English and the 
Protestants generally believe that she was willing to marry Leicester, 
while she was preparing to marry Darnley. The following notes are 
from Burghley's Journal. 

"Nov. 7, (1564.) Randolph perswadeth agret lykehood of good-will 
in the Queen of Scotts to my Lord Robert. 

Dec. 2. The Queen of Scotts offereth to be wholly directed in 
mariadg by the Erl Murray and Lord Leddyngton. 

Dec. 14. A report made by the Erl of Lenox, that he hoped his 
sone shuld marry the Queen. 

Feb. 5. Mr. Randolph wryteth at length of the Queen of Scotts al- 
lowance of my Lord of Leicester j and gyveth gret apparance of suc- 
cess in the mariadg. 

Feb. 16. Lord Darley cam to the Queen. 

March 15. The Lord Darley is favored of the Queen. 

April 15. Playnly discovered that the Queen will have the Lord 
t )ai ley. 

July 29 Lord Darley marry ed to the Queen.' 



1505.] MARY OF SCOTLAND AND LEICESTER. 187 

may the sooner, in debating with yoursolfe, resolve upon that 
that is found for you to be best ; it may please your Lord 
ship to understand, that this Queen is now content to give 
good ear unto the Queue's Majesty's suite in your behalf. 
By reports, she hath heard so much good of your Lordship, 
that she judges you worthy of any place of honour, yea, to be 
husband to any Queen : she wishes you also a kingdom of 
your own, the sooner to come by that which others think 
you worthy of. Wherefore, towards yourself she bears 
that good mind as, in honour and place she occupies, she 
may do to any, yea to that which the Quene's Majesty de- 
sireth, if those other things may ensue, that are in private 
conference between them. Whereof you thought that no 
such staye will be, as either may hinder this purpose, or be an 
occasion that the good will that is between them, may grow 
unto a coldness, or greater inconvenience ensue, then I can 
afford in my hart to speak of. Her mind and determination 
herein is committed unto the two Lords who are so affected 
unto this cause, as no men more. Declaration is made of 
their mind, and sufficient testimony of their own good 
wills. If in so good a cause, so much to the Quene's Ma- 
jesty's contentation, so profitable to your country, so com- 
forcible to your friends, and honourable to your Lordship's 
self, there be found a staye in you, as all men hitherto have 
judged your Lordship worthy to marry e the greatest Queen, 
so will this alter their opinions of you, worse then I can 
speak, or would be glad to think. But what should I be 
so mad as to believe that that could be your thought. I 
think with myself that I doe your Lordship over great in- 
jury thus to charge you*, and therefore of this matter I will 
write no more, but take it as resolved, and travel the best I 
can to bring it to effect, wherein God send me such pros- 
porous success, as in this and other I desire, that may be to 
your Lordship's honour. 

The self same occasions that were laid against your 
Lordship, of which I wrote, and of which I ground the 



188 MARY OF SCOTLAND AND LEICESTER. 

cause of your Lordship's mislikinge of me, 1 am again 
charged with, or rather your Lordship burdened to your great 
negligence to woo a Queue, without labour or travel, cost, 
charge, message, token, no not so much as once significa- 
tion of your own good will. It is enough for me always to 
say that it is no small honour for this Queen to have such a 
princess as my sovereign to be a suitor; your Lordship is 
right happy if so easily you may come by her. I would 
that I might, with much more labour and earnester travel 
then ever your Lordship took in this matter, marry e but 
some good old widow that had wherewith to keep me to- 
wards my old days. I must now crave pardon, and am 
sony to have waded so far ; my mind is not to offend, but 
in all dutiful service duly to serve your Lordship during 
my life. I might here well leave further to write unto your 
Lordship, with more thanks peradventure then to take further 
pains, but this I cannot leave out, which I must (savinge that 
which was done for my soveraigne's sake) chiefly attribute unto 
your Lordship. Greater entertainment, or greater honour could 
notbe done to the greatest ambassador that the Queue's Ma- 
jesty could have sent unto this Queen, then was done to me at 
St. Andrews. For four days together I dined and supped 
daily at her grace's table, I set next unto herself saving worthy 
Beton our mistress. I had longer talk and conference with her, 
then any other during the time. Enough, I assure your 
Lordship, if I were able to report all, can make all the ill- 
will ere to both these Quene's felicities to burst asunder for 
envy. Of your Lordship we have not spared to speak 
also, but nothing of that which of any other things I desire 
least should come unto her knowledge, wherein I have said 
so much that if half were but true, your Lordship I am sure 
is half consumed in love for her sake. 

With most humble remembrance of my duty, and recom- 
mendation of such service as lies in my power, I take my 
leave. At Edinburgh, the 6th of Fibre. 1564. 

Your honble. Lordship's bounden and ready to command, 

THO. RANDOLPHE. 



1565.1 ST-VTE OF SCOTLAND. 189 



RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

Whatsoever I write unto my Lord of Leicester, I dowte 
not but your Honour is privy thereunto, and therefore to write 
the same again should be double pain. Of this Queue's 
answer, and howe the matter was taken, that I broke last in 
with her Grace, touching the Queue's Majesty's resolution, I 
have written to his Lordship, and because there are dyvers 
other things here, which I desire should come to your 
Honor's knowledge, which put me in great dowte that other 
troubles shall rise amongst themselves or some unkindness 
grow between the Quene's Majesty and her well-willers here, 
I thought good to put that in a letter unto yourself, to be 
considered of as you find just cause. I hear day lie so 
many and grievous complaints of the state and government 
of this country, that either there is great lack of wisdom in 
those that have the chief charge to direct all things as 
theie ought to be, or great fault in the subjects that through 
their disobedience no good order, be it never so well de- 
vysed, can be observed. What troubles have risen in 
this country for religion, your Honour knows. All 
things now is grown into such a liberty, and her Grace 
taken unto herself such a will to do therein what she 
list, that of late, contrary to her own ordinances, as 
great numbers have repaired to her chapel to hear mass, as 
sometimes come to the common churches to the sermonde. 
To have her mind altered for this freedom that she desires 
to have all men lyve as theie like, she can hardly be brought, 
and thinks it too great a subjection for her, being a 
prince in her own country, to have her will broken therein. 
The subjects who desire to lyve in the true fear. and wor- 
shipping of God, offer rather their lives again to be sacri- 
ficed, then that theie would suffer such abomination, yea, 
almost permit herself to enjoy her mass, which is now 
more plainly and openly spoken against by the preach 



190 RELIGIOUS HEATS IN SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

crs, then ever was the Pope of Rome. This kmdleth in her a 
desyreto revenge, andbredeth in other a liberde to speake,and 
a wyll to attempte to amende that by force, whiche by no other 
meanes theie can gette reformed. What this may growe unto, 
excepte some spedie helpe be put unto it, I leave your Honor 
to thinke; for myselfe I wolde I were farre inoughe from the 
sight of it. Two notable blasphemes lately againste God, 
yet not worthylie punished, though somewhat done, with dif- 
ficultie inoughe, to have the doers committed to prison. A 
schoole-maister in Hedington made a playe to exercise his 
schollers agaynste the ministers, and baptized a catte in the 
name of the Father, the Sonne, &c. One of the Quene's 
Chappell, a singing man, sayde that he believed as well 
a tale of Robbin Hood as any worde that was wrytten in the 
Olde Testament or the Newe. 

Her owne masse, and the resorte unto it, such blasphemies 
as these unpunished, her wyll to contynue Papisterie, her do- 
syre to have all men lyve as theie lyste, so offendeth the 
godlye men's consciences, and so manie besydes as desyre 
alteration, that it is continuall feare that these matters wyll 
shortly breake owte to some greate mischief. By the waye, 
I wyll tell your Honor a merrie tale, but verie trewe, which 
commonlie tales are not. There is one that attendeth upon 
this courte, called Moffet, who commonlie once in three 
yeares entereth into a phrenesie. Within these twenty 
dayes his passion taketh hym with suche an imagination 
that he is the Quene's housbonde. A great Protestante he 
is, and verie godlie, when he is in his witts. He came one 
daye into the Quene's chappell, and iindyng the prieste at 
masse, drewe oute his sword, drave the prieste from the 
aulter into the vestrie, broke the challice, overthrew and 
pulled in pieces all the robes and reliques, crosse, candle- 
sticks, and all that was there cutte and broken. The masse 
sayer was the Doctor of Sorbone, and at the hearing of it 
was the Quene's physition, and, as he sayth himself, never in 
greater feare of his lyf, and hyd liymself behinde the tapes- 



1565.] CONDUCT OF QUEEN MARY. 191 

try until the execution of this masso-god was paste. This 
doth as much anger the Queen, as it doth please manic 
other, to have her sacred place thus disturbed. 

These oft debates, these common controversies between 
her and her nobles, must needs breed great myslyking, and 
so often renewed, yea, almost daily, to her great grief to 
hear of them, must needs grow to a mischief, and as theie 
say, erumpere in nervum. Above all the rest, this is it 
that is feared that will be the breach of all good accord and 
quietness of this estate, though the rest be borne with ; 
that is, if she match herself with a Papiste, by whom 
she may be fortified to her intent. Of this point there is 
no small care taken, and much dowte risen, what shall 
become of all those that in times paste have so far at- 
tempted, as to establish here churches, and without her 
consent. 

Sometimes theie take advyse to be suitors and means 
unto the Queue's Majesty, that she will be so careful of this 
estate and of these that with all reverence and humble 
sort are ready to serve her and obey her next unto their 
own sovereign, that she will so work and travail, yea, and 
so provide for her in manage, that theie may be void of 
that care which now theie do dowte, which theie do thynk 
can be no ways so well as if those matters that so longs 
have been in consultation took effect; as to match her with 
my Lord of Leicester, being himself a Protestant, should 
easily enough bring her to be of the same religion, or at 
the least cawse her to deal more moderately in those mat- 
ters than yet she doth. If this take not efiecte, whereunto 
she is now meetely well inclined, assuredly whomsoever she 
doth marry, it shall be greatly to their discontentment, be- 
sides other things that are to be dowted of the inconveniences 
that may arise between the two realms ; as if she either 
allie herself again with France, or match with Spain, 
whereof what likelihood there is, or how she is able to bring it 
to pass, your Honour may knows much more than I. But to 
what end this joniayc of my Lord of Lidington is to the 



EARL OF LENNOX IN SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

cardinall, and what devises are betweiie Grandville and Kym, 
I knowe no farther then that which I wrote in my last letter. 
One thyng I muste also saye, that all men here that either 
love their commonwelthe, or knowe what a benefyt it is to 
lyve in peace, thynk this countrie happie if theie maye gette 
(as theie call still here) my Lord Roberte. 

I have over longe helde your Honor in one purpose, hav- 
ing so manye other matters to wryte of, which I will laye 
before your Honor as playnely and trewely as I can, and leave 
the judgement to yourself, for farther is not my parte to wade. 
I have been alwayes of opinion that my Lord of Lenox com- 
ing into this countrie mighte do more hurte than good, 
wherin I never had so muche respecte unto hymself, or anye 
other man here, as I did what these men sholde judge of my 
soveraigne, or whether it might be an occasion of altering 
of divers men's affections towards her Majesty, who 
was, and yet is, accounted a protector and defender of the 
godlye of thys realme, in whom they had alwaies suche 
truste and hope, that as she hathe delivered them owte of 
their enemie's handes, so wolde she have a contynuall care 
over them, and to keepe off from them suche inconveniences 
as maye fall upon them. My Lord of Lenox is come home, 
restored and established in his lande, in place and credit with 
the Quene, an instrumente and readie to serve her againste 
anye, especiall those whom she most myslyketh. To thys 
ende he fortifieth hymselfe, he joyneth with those in moste 
straite familiaritie that are noted greateste enemies to all 
virtu, as Atholl, and Catnes,* Earles, Ruthen and Hume, 
Lords ; the Lord Robert f vayne and nothinge worthe, a man 
full of all evill, the whole guider and ruler of my Lord Dar- 
ley. 

* George Sinclair, fourth Earl of Caithness. 

t The ' Lord Robert ' so often mentioned in these letters on Scottish 
affairs, was Robert Stuart, Bishop of Caithness in 1540, created Earl 
of March in 1580. He was the brother of Matthew, Earl of Lennox, 
and the uncle of Darnley. 



1565.] THE EARL OF ARGYLE. 193 

These things being spied and noted to the worlds, it is 
easy to be seen whereunto theie are bent that in their hearts are 
enemies to the truth, and desire no thing so much as the 
subversion of those that have been maintainers of the same, as 
in special the Duke, the Earls of Murray and Argile, who 
now perceiving their intents, seek by the best means 
that theie can to prevent the same. 

Their chief trust, next unto God, is the Quene's Majes- 
tic, whom theie will repose themselves upon, not leaving 
in the mean season to provide for themselves the best they 
can. The Duke, my Lord of Murray, and my Lord of Ar- 
gel, have joined themselves within these eight days in a 
new bond, to defend each other's quarrel, that is not 
against God and their sovereign. My Lord of Argile hath 
taken into his defence, in all his just actions, the 
Eaiie of Montgomery, alias Eglintoun, * and intends to 
make a marriage between the Earl of Cassels and the 
Duke's daughter, or if that cannot be, between him and 
the Countess of Crayeforde, his ne'er kynswornan, and the 
greatest marriage in Scotland. To both these Earls my 
Lord of Lenox hath actions, who being now thus joined 
in friendship, shall be able enough to defend themselves, 
or if he intende any thing by way of deed, shall be able 
enough to debate their quarrels. Always theie are loath 
to come to this, and are sorry that any such gest is suf- 
ferd to come amongst them thatmaye give occasion to enter 
into such terms as now theie are forced into. 

It is now found by the wisest amongst them, howe 
great an oversight it was for them to give their advises to 
let him come home, and because it was much easier to 
have been stayed by the Quene's Majestic than to be with- 
stood here when this Quene's affection towards his retume 
was known, theie are sorry that her Majestic did so much 
yield unto her will to let him come, who may and is 
like enough to be occasion of so great troubles. Of my Lord 

* Hugh Montgomery, Earl of Eglinton. 
VOL. I. <> 



194 CONDUCT OF QUEEN MARY. [MARCH, 

Darlie theie have this opinion, that in wysdome he dothe 
not muche differ from his father. The honor, counte- 
nance, and entertaynement that he hathe here, maketh hym 
thynke no lyttle of hymself. Some persuade hym that there 
is no lesse good will borne unto hym by many of this nation, 
then that theye think hym a fitte partie for suche a Quene. 
Howe easylie a yonge man so borne in hande, daylie in pre- 
sense well used, contynuallie in. companie either of the beste 
or nexte aboute her, maye be induced either by hymself to 
attempte, or by persuasions of other to imagine, I leave it to 
the judgement of other. 

Of thys Queue's mynde hytherto towards hym, I am voide 
of suspicion, but what affections may be stirred up in her, or 
whether she will be at anye tyme moved that waye, seeing 
she is a woman, and in all thynges desyreth to have her 
wyll, T cannot saye. 

This is also needeiull for your Honor to understande, that 
this Quene hathe conceaved displeasure towards my Lord 
of Argile. Her hatred is still mortal towards the Duke,* 
which lately burste owte in over manie words, and in too 
manie men's hearing. He thynketh hymself in evil case. 
I fynde him more pytied and better beloved then ever he 
was. He keepeth contynuallie at home. Fewe of hys name 
repayre to the courte. Theie seeke all quietlie to live, and 
throughe innocencie or not offence of lawe to avoide all 
dangers that are intended, or what mischiefes soever shal 
be practised againste them, wherof theie do moste assure 
themselves if this Queene do marrie anye other then my Lord 
of Leicester, but specially if she take my Lord Darlie. This 
putteth no smale feare also amonge the Duglasses, for what 
cause your Honor knoweth. With dyvers of them of late I 
have had some talke. I maintayne them in good hope, the 
beste I can, that there is no danger that waie. From the Duke 
I have receaved this message, that he cannot be without feare 

* Of Chatelherault. 



1565.] 1KAKS OF THE PROTESTANT LORDS. 195 

of the overthrow of his house, if the Lord Darlie marry the 
Queen. As he has hitherto showed himself friend and 
servant to her Majestic, so he hops not a little but he shall 
always have occasion to serve and honour her during his 
life, and make his whole house bound unto her for ever. 
He did put me in remembrance of a letter written unto him 
by the Quene' s Majestic a little before his sovereign's home 
coming, assuring him of her Majesty's favour and support, 
if any thing should be unjustly attempted against him, he 
doing his duty to his sovereign. He will, therefore, re- 
pose himself wholly in the Quene's Majestic, and de- 
syreth her Highness to have such care over him as one wil- 
ling to serve her, and may hereafter be able to be a friend 
at commandment. Of this message was my Lord of Kill 
wynnie messenger, and the same again confirmed by my 
Lord of Argile, who for his own part offers all service that 
lies in his power, and of whom I have received th'effecte 
of that which I have written in my whole letter. 

These things I dowte not shall be weighed and considered 
of your Honour. To help all these unhappy men I dowte 
not but you will take the best way, and this I can assure, 
that contrary to my sovereign's will let them attempt, let 
them seek, and let them send to all the cardinals or 
devils in hell, it shall pass their powers to bring any thing 
to pass, so that that be not refused here that in reason ought 
to content her. How lunge the kingdoms will stand between 
my Lord of Murray and Lord of Lenox, your Honour may 
judge by this, that my Lord of Lenox hath joined himself 
with those whom my Lord of Murray thinks worst of 
in Scotland. What opinion the young Lord hath conceived 
of him, that lately talking with the Lord Robert, who 
showed him in the Scotch map what lands my Lord of 
Mu rraye had, and in what bounds, the Lord Darlie said 
that it was too much. This came to my Lord of Murraye's 
ear, and so to the Queen, who advised my Lord of Darlie 
to excuse himself to my Lord of Murray. The truth, 

o :> 



196 APPREHENSIONS IN SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

these be no matters to make or to take quarrels for, yet these 
suspicions, dowtes, and heart burnings betwene these noble- 
men maye breake owte to great inconveniences, and for my 
owne particular wolde not greatly e care (thoughe thys be un- 
advisedly spoken, for I know there is of nianie of those muche 
good wyll borne unto me) which ende wente forward, so 
that the Queue's Majestic maye ever be thoughte of and re- 
puted to be a patron and a friende to thys nation, as presently 
she is. 

To the contrarye of muche of thys which here I have 
wrytten, I knowe there are some that thynk other wayes, and 
judge me to be deceived. Theie build more upon their owne 
assurance, either to be able with their tonge to persuade what 
theie thynke, or truste over muche to the place of credit which 
theie occupie. Other that sholde knowe thus muche as I 
have wrytten, wolde thynke I might well have forborne 
whatsoever I thynke or knowe to put it in wry ting. Seeing 
my ende tendeth to their repose and weale, it cannot be 
thought but that I do deale with them as a frende, to take 
care for them in tyme. Or if nothynge of thys lyke them, 
I do but my dutie, where I am bounde, to let nothyng of my 
knowledge be hydde where either my countrie maye be 
hurte, or her Majesty unsatisfied or unadvertised in time of 
anye inconvenience that maye chance, which being foreseen 
is the easyer to be provided for. 

These thinges being put into my heade by some of the 
wysest sorte,and in my judgement worthy e to be considered, 
I have here reported them as nere as I can to the trewthe, 
to be thought of and weighed as you thynke them worthy e. 

I desyre nothynge more myself then that which may be 
to the Queue's Majestie's contentement. I leave further for 
thys presente to trouble your Honor, being right sorrie that 
these occasions have leade so farre as thus longe to have heldc 
you. Moste humbly I take my leave. At Edenbourge, the 
20th of Marche, 1564. 

Your Honor's bounden ever at commande, 

THO. RANDOLPHS. 



1565.] RUMOURS OF THE MARRIAGE WITH DARNLEY. 107 
CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, I thynk the two Queens have satisfied either them- 
selves with their interviews, or rather filled the desires of 
their trains.* There are sundry expectations of the French 
hereof, and as most commonly used in Prynces' cases, no 
small things projected. I dowt not but though you shall 
be far off, you will use a long angling wandf to catch some 
knowledge, and likewise I thynk you hear of some expect 
tion what shall follow of the rumour of the marriadg betwixt 
the Queen of Scots and the Lord of Darlye. The Lord of 
Lyddyngton cam hither to obtain the Quene's Majestie's 
consent, but he found great offence. Sir Nicholas Throk- 
morton was sent to declare the miscontentment of her Ma- 
jestie, and means how to break it; he returned on Friday 
well rewarded, but he could not dissolve it, although he saith 
it is misliked of all the substance of the realm, and she 
herself confesses that if it was to be done she wold be other 
wise advised ; but she is determined 3 and prays her Ma- 
jestie here to comport with her,until she will send one of hers 
hither (which shall be Mr. Hayes) to declare to the Queue's 
Majesty some reasons on her behalf. 

I thynk my Lady Lennox J shall be committed to some 
further custody, and my Lord her husband and son, shall 
ibrfait that they may here with us. And because it is likely 
their foundation in England is upon papists, the protestants 

* This of course is Stripe's authority for saying the two Queens had 
an interview, which mistake Nares was " unable to trace to its root." 
Cecil seems however to mean on the contrary that they had had enough 
of such projects, and were inclined to give it up without saying any 
more about it. See Nares' Burghley, ii. 362. 

t A fishing rod. 

J On the rumour of the intended marriage, the English council 
summoned Lenox and his son Darnley, as English subjects, to return 
to England, on pain of outlawry and forfeiture. On their refusal to 
obey, the Countess of Lenox, who was in England, was arrested, and 
remained in custody for some time. 



198 ELIZABETH AND THE ARCHDUKE. [JUNE, 

here shall receave more comfort, and the papistes more 
disgrace. 

The Emperor's ambassador is not idle in his matter, but pres- 
seth the match for the Archduke discretely and diligently ; one 
great obstacle is that the Queue's Majestie will nedes see be- 
fore she marry. And how that devise can be performed, if she 
should assent either to the French king, or to the Archduke, 
will prove hard. HerMajestieremembreth her promise to re- 
mayne free until she have well answered the French king, and 
so her Majestie considereth mete for her honor to do, which 
causeth the Emperor's ambassador to lack resolution, and yet 
he fyndeth as I heare so generall a lykyng amongst the great 
Lordes here, that he is in great hope to spede. What shall 
follow, God knoweth. 

The Lord of Leicester* furdereth the Queue's Majestie with 
all good reasons to take one of these great Prynces. Wherin 
suerly, perceaving his owne cause not sperable,t he doth 
honorably and wisely. I see four noble men devoted to 
France, but I being mancipium Regince, and lackyng witt for 
to expect so great a matter, will follow with service where her 
Majestie will go before. Sir H. Sydney will be Lord De- 
puty in Ireland. Shan O'NeyleJ hath overthrown James 
Maconele, and takyn hym and his brother ; wherin a num- 
ber of English soldiers being with Shan did only gayne the 
victory. If now the Queue's Majestie may have the possession 
of these prisoners, it shall be profitable, otherwyse Shane's 
victory will be dangerous for Ireland. 

Our Commissioners at Brudges are lyke to agree uppon all 
thyngs, saving the matter of pondage, and the new subsidy 

* This, and some other passages of Cecil's letters, seems to discoun- 
tenance the assertion so often made, that Leicester was opposed, from 
interested motives, to all the Queen's projects of marriage. It must 
be remembered, that Cecil was not a friend of Leicester, and that he 
wrote to Smith in perfect confidence. 

t Hopeful. 

Shane was now engaged on the side of the Queen, against the 
Scottish islanders. 



1565.] TRADE WITH FLANDERS. 199 

for clothes. For the pondage, the Duchess of Parma will 
send hither persons to see our records here in the chequer. For 
the subsidy, we cannot yield, and if we shall, it will be with 
some moderation only for strangers, whose custom is 14.5. 6d. 
upon a cloth, which before was but 3s. 2d. Nevertheless, 
this my opinion is very secret. 

They complain of an infinite number of pirates, and 
though the treaty provide cautions, yet the demands are so 
great, as we must needs remitt the complaints to justice to be 
done upon the persons. 

And thus you see I have scribbled many things in hast to 
satisfy your expectation, assuring you my letter is so little, 
as I thynk this is to be the twentieth letter already written 
this day. On Sunday, 3 Junii, 1565. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECIL. 

Great means is made for Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to be 
of the privy counsel, and so I wish you both. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER. 

May it please your Lordship, I have received your Lord 
shipp's letter by my servant, sufficient testimony of your 
favour towards me, where I think myself always so as that 
what other mishap soever befall me, I have enough to 
com forte myself with. 

Though I have not at this time received neither according 
to the mode I fond in, nor the necessity of the service that 
I am employed, I will rather pass it as I may with pa- 
tience, than trouble your Lordship to be suitor for me 
where there is so little hope that any good will be done 
for me. 

I dowte not but your Lordship hath heard by such infor- 
motion as I have given from hence, what the present state of 
this country is, howe this Queen is now become a married 



000 APPREHENSIONS IN SCOTLAND. [JULY, 

wife, and her husband, the self same daye of his marriage, made 
a kinge. In their desyres hytherto they have founde so 
muche to their contents, that if the rest succede and prosper 
accordinglie, theie maye thinke themselves much happier than 
there is appearance that theie shal be. So manie discon- 
tented mynds, so muche myslyking of the subjectes to have 
these matters thus ordered in this sorte to be brought to pass, 
I never hearde of anye marriage. So little comforte as men 
do take, was never seen at any tyme where men sholde have 
shewed themselves to rejoice, if that consyderation of her 
own honor and of her countrie had bene had as appertayned 
in so weightie a case. Thus theie feare the overthrow of re- 
ligion, the breache of amity with the Queue's Majestie, de- 
struction of as manie of the nobilitie as she hath myslyking 
of, or that he to pick a quarrell unto. 

To see all these inconveniences approaching there are good 
number that maye soner lamente with themselves and com- 
playne to their neighbours, than able to fynde remedy e to 
helpe them. Some attempte with all force theie have, but 
are too weake to do anye good. What is required other wayes, 
what meanes ther is made, your Lordshipp knoweth, what 
wil be answerde, or what wil be therin, we are in great dowte, 
and tho your intente be never so good unto us, yet we so 
muche feare your delay e? that our ruin shall prevent your 
support. When counsell is once taken, nothynge so nedefull 
as spedie execution, upon this we wholly depende. In her 
Majestie's hands it standeth to save our lives or to suffer us 
to perishe. 

Greater honor her Majestic cannot have then in that 
which lyeth in her power to do for us. The somes are not 
greate, the numbers of men are not manie that we desyre ; 
monie wyll daylye be founde though thys wil be some charge, 
men growe day lie, though at thys tyme I thynk her Majestic 
shall lese but fewe. Her friends here being once taken away, 
where wyll her Majestic fynde the lyke ? I speake leaste of 
that which I thynke is most earnestlye intended by this Queue 



1565.] LORD DARNLEY. 201 

and her husband, when by him it was lately said that 
he cared more for the Papists in England then he did for the 
Protestants in Scotland. If therefore his hope be so great 
in the Papists of England, what may your Lordship be- 
leve what he thinks of the Protestants there : for his birth, 
for his nurriture, for th'honor he has to be of kin to the 
Queen, my mestres, if in preferring those that are the 
Quene's Majesty's worst subjects, to those that are her best, 
he declares what mind he bears to the Quene's Majesty's 
self, any man may say that it is slenderly awarded, and 
his duty evel forgotten. He would now seem to be in- 
different to both the religions, she to use her mass, and he 
to come sometimes to the preaching. 

Theie were married with all the solemnities of the popyshe 
time, saving that he heard not the mass ; his speech 
and talk argues his mind, and yet would he fain seem to 
the world that he were of some religion. His words to all 
men against whom he conceaveth any displeasure, howe un 
just soever yt be, so proud and spiteful, that rather he 
seems a monarch of the world than he that not lunge since 
we have scene and known the Lord Darlye. He looks 
now for revenue of many that have little will to give yt 
him, and some there are that do give it that think him 
little worthy of it. 

All honour that may be attributed unto any man by a 
w r if, he has yt wholly and fully, all praise that may 
be spoken of him he lacks not from herself, all dignities 
that she can endue him with are already given and granted. 
No man pleases her that contents not him, and what 
may I say more, she has given over unto him her whole 
will, to be ruled and guided as himself best likes. She 
can as much prevail with him in any thing that is 
against his will, as your Lordship may with me to per- 
swade that I should hang myself. This last dignity out 
of hand to have him proclaimed King, she would have 
had it differed until it were agreed by Parliament, or 



202 MARRIAGE OF MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. [JULY, 

had bene hymself of twenty -one yeres of age, that thyngs 
done inhys name myght have the better autoritye. He wold 
in no case have it differed one daye,and either then or never. 
Wherupon thys dowte is rysen amongest our men of lawe, 
whether she beinge clade with a housbande, and her hous- 
bande not twenty-one yeres, anythynge withowte Parle- 
mente can be of strengthe that is done betwene them. Upon 
Saturdaye at afternone these matters were longe in deba- 
ting, and before theie were well resolved upon, at nine 
howers at night, by three herauldes at sounde of the trum- 
pet, he was proclamed Kinge. Thys was the night before 
the marriage. This daye, Mondaye, at twelve of the clocke, 
the Lords, all that were in thys towne, were presente at the 
proclaiming of hym agayne, when no man sayd so muche as 
Amen, savinge his father, that cried owte aloude, " God save 
his Grace !" 

The manner of the marriage was in thys sorte. Upon 
Sondaye, in the morninge, betwene five and six, she was 
conveide by divers of her nobles to the chappell. She had 
upon her backe the greate mourninge gowne of blacke, with 
the greate wyde mourninge hoode, not unlyke unto that which 
she wore the dolefull day of the buriall of her housbande. 
She was ledde unto the chappell by the Earles Lenox and 
Athol, and there she was lefte untyll her housband came, 
who also was conveide by the same lords. The ministers, 
two priests, did there receave them. The bans are asked the 
thyrde tyme, and an instrumente taken by a notarie that no 
man sayde agaynst them, or alledged anye cause why the 
marriage might not precede. The words were spoken, the 
rings, which were three, the middle a riche diamonde, were 
put upon her finger, theie kneel together, and manic prayers 
saide over them. She carrieth owte the .... and he 
taketh a kysse and leaveth her there and wente to her cham- 
ber, whither in a space she followeth, and there being re- 
quired, accordinge to the solemnitie to cast off her care, and 
lay asyde those sorrowfull garments, and give herself to a 






1565.] MARRIAGE OF MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 203 

pleasanter life. After some pretty refusal, more I believe for 
manner sake then grief of heart, she suffers them that 
stood by, every man that could approach to take out a 
pyn, and so being committed unto her ladies changed her 
garments, but went not to bed, to signify unto the 
world that it was no lust moved them to marry, but 
only the necessity of her country, not if she will to leave 
it destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are 
given of all things to make the worst, would that it should 
be believed that theie knew each other before that 
theie came there. I would not your Lordship should so be- 
lieve, the likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if 
it were possible to se such an act done, I would not believe it. 
After the marriage follows commonly cheer and dancing. 
To their dinner theie were conveyed by the whole nobles. 
The trumpets sound, a larges cried, and money thrown 
about the hows in great abundance to such as were 
happy to get any part. Theie dine both at one table' 
upon the upper hand. There serve her these Earls Ethel, 
shower, Morton, carver, Crayforde, cupbearer. These serve 
hymen like offices Earls Eglinton,Cassells, and Glencarne. 
After dinner theie dance awhile, and retire themselves till the 
hour of supper, and as theie dine so do theie sup. Some 
dancing there was, and so theie go to bed. 

Of all this that I have written to your Lordship, J am 
not oculatus testis, but of the verity your Lordship shall not 
need to dowte, howsoever I came by it. 

I was sent for to have been at the supper, but like a cur- 
rich or uncourtoyse carl, I refused to be there, and yet that 
which your Lordship may think might move me much 
to have had the sight of my mestres, of whom those eighteen 
days by just account I got not a sight. I am, my Lord, 

taken by all that sort a very * which in my heart do 

well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can I not 
find either honest or good that likes their doings, 
* A word or two illegible. 



204 TUMULT IN EDINBURGH. [AUG. 

I leave at thys tyme farther to trouble your Lordship, 
craving pardon for my long silence. I have more ado than 
I am able to discharge. I walke more nowe abrode by 
nighte then by daye, and the daye too lyttle to discharge 
myself of that which I conceive or receive in the nighte. As 
your Lordship I am sure is partaker of suche letters as I 
wryte unto Mr. Secretarie, so I truste that he shal be to 
this, to save me of a lyttle labor to wryte the same agayne. 
Most humblye I take my leave. 

At Edenbourge, thelaste of Julye, 1565. 

Your Lordship's alwayes bounde ever to commande. 

Two thyngs I had almoste forgotten, th'one was, to honor 
the feaste the Lord Earsken * was made Earle of Marre, and 
manie made knightes that never shewed any greate token 
of theire vasellage. Th'other is that the Lord St. John had 
his office of Chief Chamberlayne taken from hym, and it was 
given to the Lord Flemenge, nowe in principall credit with 
our newe Kynge. 



THE EARL OF BEDFORD TO CECIL. 

(Extract, 18 Aug., 1565.) 

The newe King's souldiers and the townsmen of Edin- 
broughe have bene together by the eares, and some of the 
townsmen slayne. Their king was putting on his armour, to 
have parted the fraye, but did not, or if he did, came not 
abrode. 

He loseth many of his frendes dayly, who, seeing his go- 
vernment, leane to th'other parte. 

The Quene getteth as many to her masse, and never was 
there so many as now there were at it on Sonday last. 

* John, fifth Lord Erskine. He Was elected regent in 1571, and died 
the following year. 



1565.] TUMULTS IN THE BORDERS. 205 

The have done great things of late, as the burn 
ing of a town called Hawycke, and therefore are to be con- 
sydered. Preparation is made to ride upon them by 
that realm, and had they not so stirred as they did on their 
own neighbours and countrymen, our marches had long be- 
fore this time smarted therefore. And if they be ridden 
uponand be not helped, they cannot hold out, but must needs 
give over, and shall have their pardons, as it is thought, for 
this time offred them. And if the Erie Bothewell come, who 
is their Lord, then will they go with him, if there be none 
other way taken before, which I refer to your wisdom. 
And to say to you mine opinion, things might be wrought on 
their party and behalf, and that in such sort, if the 
Queue's Majestic so wold, as both might direct the force 
meant against them some other way, and no damage 
ensue to th'erle of Murray by such as wold strive against 
him. How and in what sort I shall declare to you here- 
after. He that was schole-master to the Lord Darley, whether 
he be an Englishman or a Scott I know not, is, as I hear, 
come out of Flaunders into Scotland, and is well received 
there. * * * * 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, Ye shall understand by the Queue's Majestie's letters 
what hath passed betwixt the French ambassador and her. 
It seems that he sends now his secretary to hasten his re- 
vocation. And for yours, I assure you I do all that I can, 
and am in some hope shortly to give you knowledge thereof. 
Wherewith I mean to send your son, who was very well- 
come to me, and well liked. Wishing that he were again 
with you, for that he seems to have well profited in obser- 
vation of many things there. 



206 THE SCOTTISH LORDS OPPOSE THE MARRIAGE. [AUG. 

Mr. Tomworth * was sent to the Quene of Scotts uppon 
this occasion ; the Scottish Quene hath sent twice hyther to 
require the Quene's Majestic to declare for what causes she 
did mislike of this marriadg, offering also to satisfy the same. 
In the meantyme troubles arise there betwixt her and the 
Erie of Murraye and others being frendly to the warm amyty 
of both the realmes, wherunto for sundry respects it seemeth 
convenient for us to have regard. The Duke, the Erles of 
Argile, Murray and Rothoss, with sundry Barons, are joyned 
together not to allow of the marriadg, otherwise than to have 
the relligion established by law, but the Quene refuseth in 
this sort : she will not suffer it to have the force of law, but 
of permission to every man to lyve according to his con- 
science. And herwith she hath retayned a great number of 
Protestants from associating openly with the other. She hath 
sent for the Erie Murray, but the mistrust is so fan* entred on 
both sydes, that I thynk it will fall to an evill end, for 
she hath putt the Erie of Murray to the horn, and prohi- 
bited all persons to ayd hym. Nevertheless, the Duke, the 
Erles of Argile and Rothoss are together with hym. We shall 
heare by Mr. Tomworth what is most lykely to follow. The 
French ambassador maketh hast to depeche his secretary, and 
that maketh me to hasten upp this letter. 

You may perchans by some private letter herafter heare of a 
strange accident here, and therfore I will in few words gyve 
you some light. The Quene's Majesty is fallen into some mis- 
lyking of my Lord of Leicester, and he therwith much dis- 
mayed. You know how busy men in court will be to descant 
hereuppon. The Quene's Majesty letteth it appear in many 
overt speeches that she is sorry of her loss of tyme, and so is 
every good subject, f 

* Tomworth was a gentleman of Elizabeth's privy chamber he is 
said by some to have behaved somewhat rudely in his mission. He was 
stopped on his return, because he had no passport. The passport had 
not been obtained, in order not to acknowledge Darnley as king. 

t The foregoing paragraph is partly in cypher. 






1565.] LADY MARY GREY. 207 

What shall follow of this God knows. For my part I will 
do that becomes an honest man, not to procure harm to 
him, though I know he hath not lacks procurers for my 
harrae. But God forgive them ! for I fear none of them, 
having so good a conscience of my well meaning both to her 
Majesty and the realm. If I were as evil disposed as 
others, I could make a flame of this sparkell. JSutJiat vo- 
luntas Dei ! The Queue's Majestic, thanked be God, is well 
disposed towards mariadg. Th'Emperor's ambassador is de- 
parted with an honourable answer, and himself well satisfied; 
and common opinion is, that the Archduke Charles will 
come, which if he do, and will accord with us in religion, 
and shall be allowable for his person to her Majestic, then, 
except God shall purpose to continue his displeasure against 
us, we shall see some success. 

Here is an unhappy chance and monstrous. The ser- 
joint porter, being the biggest gentleman in this court, hath 
married secretly the Lady Mary Grey,* the least of all 
the court. They are committed to several prisons. The of 
fence is very great. And so now being hasted by the French 
ambassador, I end. From Windsor, the 21st of August, 
1565. 

I thank you for your diligent advertisements. 
Your assured to command, 

W. CECIL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

I do not well remember whether I wrote to you of the 
Emperor's ambassador's answer here. The Queue's Majesty 
will marry with none without sight of his person, nor with any 
that shall dissent in religion ; for the rest of the articles 

* Sister of the Lady Catherine Grey, who had already been impri- 
soned for a similar offence. The person she married was Martin Keys, 
groom-porter to Queen Elizabeth. 



208 JEALOUSIES IN THE ENGLISH COURT. [OCT. 

they are referred to the treaty betwixt King Phillipp and Queen 
Mary. I think the Archduke will come, but of his religion 
nobody shall know I think but her Majesty, nor she untill 
he see hope of spedyng. The whole nobilitie to my under- 
standyng favor this very much, and my Lord of Leicester hath 
behaved himself very wisely to allow of it. I am so willing 
to have you come home, that, my brother being named as 
your successor, I do press hym much agaynst his will. 
The 30th of August, almost at midnight. 

Our entercourse standeth uppon narrow poynts, and all for 
our impost of clothes : but yet I trust they will accord. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, considering your sonne commeth thyther, he can report 
to you all common news and rumors here, and yet percase 
all are not true that he may think true, for so I see men of 
good understanding here many tymes abused. Indede here 
are sondry devises of our own inwarde causes. Some make 
and devise talk, as though some of the counsell wer of one 
mynd concerning the Scottish causes, and some of another. 
True it is that arguments have bene made contrarywyse, 
some to ayd the Lordes of Scotland playnly and oppenly, 
some but covertly, some not at all ; but in the end the Queue's 
Majesty hath resolved to use all good meanes by mediation, 
by outward countenance, to relieve them, but to do nothyng 
that may break peace. 

Agayne ther are sondry rumors that the Lordes here do 
not accord together, that my Lord of Leicester should not 
have so great favor as he had ; that my Lord of Sussex * and 
* Cecil has entered in his journal during this year (1565.) 
"June 16. The variance betwixt the Erles of Sussex and Leicester. 
- 20. The two Erles of Sussex and Leicester accorded in the 
Quene's Majestie's presence." 



1565.] VARIANCES AMONG ELIZABETH'S COURTIERS. 209 

be should be in strange terms ; that my Lord of Norfolk, my 
Lord Chamberlain, my Lord of Hunsden, &c., should also 
not allow of my Lord of Leicester, that Mr. Hennadg should be 
in very good favour with her Majestic, and so misliked by my 
Lord of Leicester, with such infinite toys ; but I trust her of no 
harm in dede shall follow, for all these Lords are bent towards 
her Majestie's service, and doo not so much vary amongst 
themselves, as lewd men do report. To tell you truly, I 
thynk the Queene's Majestie's favour to my Lord of Leicester be 
not so manifest as it was, to move men to thynk that she will 
marry with him ; and yet his Lordship hath favour sufficient, 
as I hear him say to his good satisfaction. My Lord of 
Sussex thinks that my Lord of Leicester might do more for 
him in causes of Irland than he hath. My Lord of Norfolk 
loves my Lord of Sussex earnestly, and so all that stock of 
the Howards seem to join in friendship together, and yet 
in my opinion without cause to be misliked ; and for the 
Duke, I thynk England hath not had in this age a nobleman 
more likely to prove a father and a staye to this country, and 
so I am glad to perceive the Queene's Majesty to have him in 
estimation : he is wise, just, modest, careful, et timens Deum. 

Sir Nicholas Throkmorton is also much noted by speech 
to be a director of my Lord of Leicester, but I thynk my 
Lord well able to judge what is mete or unmete, and doth use 
Mr. Throgmorton friendly because he doth show himself 
careful and devote to his Lordship. What is said of me I 
thynk I cannot know ; but this I am assured of, that I have 
no affection to be of a party, but for the Queene's Majestic, 
and I will always travel to accord noblemen, and not to 
minister devises of discord. You see I make report to my 
own praise, and to belly myself were madness, but when trial 
shall be, you shall see I report truly of myself ; and God send 
me his assistance to be void of fear or partial love to any 
but to her Majestic, whom whilst I serve truly, I do find 
many stumbling blocks and dangerous. 

Now of other common matters. 

VOL. i. P 



210 THE LADY CECILIA OF SWEDEN. [OCT. 

Our treaty of Brudges is continued l untill the 15th of 
March, as by a proclamation her with sent you shall see ; 
and now we here are occupied in devisyng how either to ac- 
cord without our disadvantage at the next metyng, or else to 
cease the intercourse, and nevertheless to contynew traffick 
and amyty : a matter indede lyke a maze to walk in. 

We have lately devised a way for the stay of frequent 
depredations, the copy of certain articles I do herewith send 
you, and of a commission which is even now newly sent to 
all ports; only now Wilson, your old servant, is on the seas, 
and fyndeth more favor than is mete nere Barwyke. He 
semeth to serve agayne the Queene of Scotland. 

Malvesyre* is returned, and has not profitted with the 
Queene, as he sayth ; so ernestly she is bent agaynst the Duke 
and his accomplyces. 

She hath bene in the feeld with five or six thousand these 
eight dayes, but what she shall obteyne I cannot tell. The 
Lords are at Dumfrees without any force of importance. 
Ther principall force is an unyversall good will of the realme, 
saving of a few about the Queene. 

Sir Henry Sydney hath his commission to be Lord Deputy 
in Irland ; he departeth within these four dayes. Mr. Arnold 
shall return, as others have doone, with mislykyng. Of the 
Lady Cecilia of Sweden,t your sonne can\report, how boun- 

1 i. e. adjourned. 

* The French ambassador to Scotland. 

t Sister to the King of Sweden, and Margravine of Baden. " She 
and her husband/' saith Stowe, "after a long and dangerous journey, 
wherein they had travelled almost eleven months, sailing from Stoke- 
holme, crossing the seas over into Lifeland, from whence by land they 
came about by Poland, Prussy, Pomerland, Meckberge, Friseland, 
and so to Antwerpe in Brabant, then to Caleis, and at the last in 
September landed at Dover, where they were met and received by the 
Lord Cobham with a goodly traine of knights and gentlemen." She 
was delivered of a son on the fifteenth of September, " which child 
the last of September was christened in the Queene's Majestic 's chap- 
pell of Whitehall, at Westminster, the Queene's Majestic in her owne 



1565. J EL1XA1JKTH AM) THE ARCHDIKK CHARLES. 

tifully she lyveth here, of whom also there are sundry opi- 
nions, some that she meant to set on foot her brother's former 
sute of mariadg, but perceiving that not to be found probable, 
some now saye that she will furder my Lord of Leicester's to- 
wards her Majestic, but if she shall fynd no success therof, 
then some will saye as they list, and thus you see how all 
thyngs are subject to reports. Some also, yea many, look for 
answer from th'emperor for Charles' coming, and many thynk 
therof to see success. I indede thynk if he should come, that 
then I should be nerer to joye or greef, for therof must nedes 
insue a determy nation what to looke for. And thus have I 
ranged over the feelds, wrytyng as you see at rovers, but yet so 
as I thynk you will gather some kynd of certenty wherby to 
judg of reports. The Queene's Majestic hath answered to the 
French ambassador, that w^her he offred that the Kyng there 
wold send by hym, that should come to be stalled her, the 
order of France for my Lord of Leicester, and another, she 
thanked the French Kyng, but for any to be sent with more 
than to be stalled at this tyme she required to have it diflerred. 
Now for yourself: the Queeiie's Majestie hath determined 
that my brother-in-law, Mr. Thomas Hobby,* shall come in 

person being godmother, the Archbishop of Canterburie and the Duke 
of Norfolke godfathers : at the christening the Queene gave the child to 
name Edwardas Fortunatus, for that God had so graciously assisted 
his mother in so long and dangerous a journey." The Margrave left 
England on his return, near the end of the year. The Margravine 
stayed some time after her husband's departure. A correspondent of 
the Earl of Shrewsbury writes, Dec. 11, 1565, "The Marquis of, 
Bawden, being gone home into Germanye, hathe lefte here behynde 
him in the courte the Lady Cecilie his wyfe, with whose companye 
and conversation the Quene is so moche delighted as she doothe not 
onely allowe her very honorable bouge of courte, thre measse of meate 
twyse a daye, for her mayds and the rest of her familie, but also her 
Majestie hathe delte so liberally with her husbande, that he hathe a 
yerely pension of two thousand crownes, which he is toenjoye so longe 
as he suffereth the ladye his wife to resyde here in Englande." Lodge, 
Illustrations, vol. i. p. 358. 

* Sir Thomas Hobby, of Bisham Abbey in Berkshire, who married 

P2 



212 RANDOLPH IN DANGER. [OCT. 

your place, and he being therof moved by me, hath taken it 
unkyndly at my hand. Wheruppon her Majestie hath willed 
my Lord of Leicester to lett hym understand peremptorily her 
Majestie's pleasur; which, though unwillyngly, I know he 
will not deny ; and my Lord dayly promiseth me to send for 
hym, but yet it is not done, and therfore I mean to have my 
Lady your wife either to speak or send to hys Lordship. 
And now I must end with this paper. From Westminster, 
the 16th of Octob. 1565. 

Your assured to command, 

W. CECILL. 



QUEEN ELIZABETH TO RANDOLPH. 

BY THE QUEEN. 

ELIZABETH R. 

Trusty and well-beloved, we greete you well. Understand- 
ing by a letter of our cousin, th'erle of Bedford, to our Se- 
cretarie, that he thinketh you to be not out of danger there 
by malice, in so much as some pistoles have ben shot into 
the howse where you lodge; we have thoughte it meete, not 
only to advise you, if you fynde any such perrill, but also to 
lycence you to withdraw yourself for a tyme to Barwicke : 
pretending the same to be for your own pryvate busynesse, 
in sort, as you may returne to your charge upon occasion. 

Gyven under our signet, at our Palais of Westminster, the 
third of October, 1565, the seventh yere of our reign. 



EARL OF CLANRICKARD * TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 
After my right harty commendations, your Worship may 

Elizabeth, fourth daughter of Sir Anthony Coke, whose eldest daughter 
Mildred was the wife of Cecil. Sir Thomas died at Paris, in 1566. 

* Richard de Burgh, only son of Ulick de Burgh, first Earl of Clan- 
rickard by Maud de Lacie. Sir Henry Sydney, in his account of his 



1565.] IRELAND. SHANE o'NEIL. 213 

be advertised that O'Nell* came into the lower parts of Con- 
nought, and camped there in O'Rork's country, and O'Con- 
ner Sligo's country, and M'Dermond's country, six or seven 
days, and there he burnt the come and spoiled the whole 
countries, carrying away thence above three or four thousand 
cattle. His coming thither was to require the tribute due 
in old time to them that were kings in this realm, and 
wold have had the same yearly paid to himself, and for 
security thereof he required pledges to be delivered unto 
him from the same Lords and such other th'inhabitants of 
these parts ; he required also to have an ordinary force quar- 
terly levied out of all these countries, at such time as he 

progress in 1567, addressed to the Queen, bears an honourable testimony 
to the Earl of Clanrickarde's government of his own lands : " From 
thence I travelled thorough Clanrycarde, and found the country in 
good quiet, universally well tilled and manured, and was at two of 
the Erie's houses very honourably entertained." 

* We are now approaching Shane's last rebellion. Whilst he was 
professing the most faithful allegiance to the Queen, under pretence of 
attacking the Scots of the Isles, he had long been making extensive 
preparations for war, and rejected the title of Tyrone which had been 
conferred upon him, vaunting amongst his own men that he would be 
King of Ulster. "When he saw that "he was able to levy of his owrie 
a thousand horse and four thousand foot, and had already a guard of 
seven hundred men, he disdained in a barbarous pride all such ho- 
norable titles in comparison of the name of O'Neal, and vaunted him- 
self among his own people for King of Ulster, trained the country 
people to war, offered the kingdom of Ireland to theQueene of Scots, 
and boiled in hatred against the English in such sort, that he named 
a castle which he built in the lake Eagh, Feoghnegall, that is, the 
hatred of the English, and strangled some of his own men for that 
they fed on English bread." (Camden.) The preparations of this 
turbulent chieftain were much neglected by the English court. They 
excited in the mind of Sussex great uneasiness, and the last days of 
his government were spent in taking measures for defence. He was 
succeeded by Sir Henry Sydney, who was immediately engaged in sup- 
pressing the open and formidable rebellion of the O'Neil. Sydney 
was made Lord President on the 13th of October, 1505, and arrived 
at Dublin on the 13th of January following. 



214 SHANE O'NKIL'S LAST REBELLION. [OCT. 

should rysse up and require the same to mayntayne his hosts 
withall. Your wisedom maye consyder hereof, for I clout it 
be to any good purpose, and I pray you blame me not for 
wry ting plainely what I think, for I assure you it is a great lyke- 
hood towards, that the realme, if it be not spedely looked into, 
wyll be at a great hasard to run as far owt of her Majestie's 
hands as ever it was out of any her Highnes' predecessors in 
tyme before passed. And if it had pleased my Lord Justice 
and the residue of her Majestie's consell to have granted 
unto me such petitions as I was suitor to their Honors for to 
have, for the daunting of the unruly neighbors about me, 
and to have brought them in under my governance, as I re- 
quyred, I trust I should have ben able enough to have met 
O'Nell with all his force, and repulsed him from any such 
presumptuous attempt. And although he was of so great force, 
yet if we had met, as ther was but a mountayne between us 
both, I marched so near hym lying in campe against my 
enemies, I trust I shold have adventured then a set against hym, 
for I had as many horsemen almost as he had. This matter 
ought to be looked unto in due tyme, or ells it will grow to a 
nere end, I fear me, and if the Lord Justice and the counsell 
will apoynt me ayd for these parts of the realme, and to sub- 
due them that are owt in my country, that their power might be 
with me, I trust I shold work so as O'Nell should repent 
his coming hither to demand such tribute, and it is not a 
good touch of any that meaneth to be a good subject and 
servant to her Majesty indede. 

I beseche you let me know your mynd herin by this berer, 
my servant, and what my Lord Justice and the rest of the 
counsell shall determyne herin. And so I take my leave, at 
Balboughreugh, the 15th of October, 1565. 

Your assured frend, 

RICHARD CLANRYCKERD. 

\ 



1565.] Till': SCOTTISH BORDERS. 215 

THE EARL OF BEDFORD TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER. 

After ray most hartyest commendations to your good Lord 
ship, I received now lately from you a most friendly, ho- 
norable, and gentle letter of the 20th of this present, contain 
ing very good and necessary advise for these times. I 
most heartily thank your Lordship for the same, and if I could 
tell or devise which way to become more bound unto you, 
then already I am, I would not let to confess and acknow- 
ledge the same. But this to be said for all, that I am your 
Lordship's, as assured as you desire. 

The Queue's Majesty, as appears by her Majestie's let- 
ters, is offended at the Earl of Murray's coming up,* which 
as I wrote to you and others, I could not withstand without 
force, for persuasions nor dissuasions would not serve. And 
I had no commandment from her Majesty to staye him here, 
no more have I to staye the other Lords and the rest, if they 
were disposed to return home. And how I shall deal in 
these cases I know not, for thinking to do the best, it is 
misliked, and almost nothing well taken that I do. I shall 
therefore keep myself within the compass of the commission 
I have, or shall have from time to time, and will not hence- 
forth be so forward, but will be rather slow, for I see it is 
all one, yet more thanks me seems hath the one than the 
other. 

I am advertised four or five ways that the Scottish Queen 
means to take Ay nouth,f and that even shortly. I have 
written heretofore that it hath been often viewed, and now I 
write that it will be fortify ed. That Queen sends men to 
divers places, as to Kelsoe four hundred, to Hume Castle fifty 
harquebusyers, and yet cannot we be persuaded that the Queen 
means wars, because we mean peace. How peace will 

* The Earl of Murray, with other Lords, having incurred the dis- 
pleasure of their Queen, by their open opposition to her marriage 
with Darnley, took refuge in England, whence they now returned, 
and after Rizzio's murder were taken into favour. 

t Eyemouth, about seven miles from Berwick. 



216 UNEASINESS OF THE BORDERS. [JAN. 

follow upon such prognostications of warres I cannot con- 
ceyve, nor it will not sinke into my head. 

1 have heard the old borderers saye that the Scottes wer 
ever those that broke the peace, and sett upon the warres, 
either by stealyng or open violence. And because they be 
of an old custome the first, and ever aforehand with us, we 
are loath to break them of the same, for we never stirre till 
we have receyved too much injury, or else feele it smart too 
sore. I would be as glad of a good and assured peace as any 
other, and as much 1 have done to preserve the same. These 
news I heare of Aymouth come from the borderers here, 
who allbeit they heare somewhat from other places, yet by 
my next I shall tell you more certainly how all thinges there- 
abouts will frame. And so for this tyme, &c. From Ber- 
wicke, this 26th of October, 1565. 

Your Lordship's most assured friend, 

BEDFORD. 



RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

I have the longer forborne to wryte unto your Honour, 
attending upon some matter worthy the reporting. Thys 
court of longe tyme hathe been very quiet, small resorte of 
any, and manye of those that come but slenderly welcome for 
the great and importune sute made by them for my Lord of 
Murraye and the reste who by no meanes can fynde any 
favour at her Grace's handes, in so muche that Roberte Mel- 
vin hathe receaved for resolute answer that let the Queen of 
England do for them what she wyll, theie shall never live in 
Scotlande and she together. I cannot but thynke them in 
verie hevie case, and so God assyste them, as yt is his wyll ! 
Roberte Melvin* departeth towards them shortly agayn ; 

* This Robert Melvil, the brother of Sir James Melvil, whose own 
memoirs were published by G. Scott, was sent to England by Mary, 
openly to treat on public affairs, but secretly as a spy. 



1566.] QUEEN MARY AND HER HUSBAND. 217 

and what further comes of him 1 know not. It is now 
spoken for certain that she is with child, and as it is said 
she felt it stir in her belly upon new yore's day. Some 
ladies affirm that she has milk in her breasts, and finding 
all other tokens to concur belonging to women lately married, 
assure it for certain that it can be none other. 

What other folk's opinions are I need not to write, only 
I may say that many can hardly believe that there is any 
such matter, and therefore I dowte not but you will for a 
time suspend your judgment, seeing there are here so many 
that know not what theie may think, that are as curious to 
know the verity (if it were possible) as any men may be. 

I cannot tell what mislykings of late there has been be- 
twene her Grace and her husband : he presses earnestly for 
the matrimonial crown, which she is loathe hastily to 
grant, but willing to keep somewhat in store until she 
know how well he is worthy to enjoy e such a sovereignty, 
and therefore it is thought that the parliament for a time 
shall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty. 

The sudden death of the late Pope* has greatly 
altered many of our purposes, and to have the more to 
greve us with we hear that the legate that lay in Flanders 
that came from his Holiness is drowned in a ship beside 
Aberdyne, driven by tempest to that coast. 

We hear also of the ship that was wrecked beside Bam- 
broke,f and fear that it was he whom from hence we sent 
into Spain. We desire rather the letters that were found 
with him, then make any great account of so small a sum 
of money as two thousand pounds that was found with him. 
If of all these cares we be not relieved through the good hope 
we have that the Cardinal of Lorraine shall be Pope, we think 
ourselffes far behind hand. 

* Pius IV. died on the 8th of December, 1565, and was succeeded 
by Michael Ghisleri as Pius V., elected on the 17th January following, 
t Bamborough. 



218 SHANE O'NEIL AND THE EARL OF AKGYLE. [JAN. 

Ramboyliet* is daylie looked for with the order. Whether 
he cometh to any other Intente or purpose that unto the good 
araytie that is to be desyred betwene the two countries may 
be hurtefull, your Honor knoweth better then I, and am as- 
sured wyll provide for it in tyme, if any such be. I am 
sorrie to see thinges stande in suche termes that I cannot 
assure the Queue's Majestic at this present who in this 
countrie is her frende. I am loath to make any thynge ap- 
peare worse then it is, but am muche leather that her Majestic 
sholde be abused, for so I feare her Highnes shall fynde yt. 
This Quene attendeth dayly the answer touchyng commis- 
sioners, but in speciall what shal be saide to the laste com- 
playnte agaynst the Earle of Bedforde, upon which only it 
stayeth that Blacader and other seeke not the revenge where 
theie thynke to take moste advantage. If of my doinge her 
Grace have made any reporte, I truste so muche in the 
Queue's Majestie's moste speciall goodnes and favour, that 
her Highnes' judgement shal be suspended untyll I maye 
presently answer whatsoever anye of this nation is able to 
charge me with. 

I have wrytten unto your Honor at sometymes of some 
confederation or league to be betwene my Lord of Argile and 
Shane O'Nell. I see nowe that withowte delay it taketh 
effecte. Theie have of late mette together, and marriage 
concluded betwene James Macconel sone and O'Nel's 
daughter, and O'Nel's sone and James' daughter, to enjoy the 
lande that James Macconel made clayme unto in Irelande. 

The Earle of Argile fynding here so little favour and so 
small supporte, otherwyse maketh hymself by other meanes 
so stronge as he can. 

His wyfe is presently here in this towne, arrived but yester- 
daye, and hathe not yet bene at the courte. What her sute 
is I knowe not, nor yet James Macconel's wyfe, who also is 
here, with whome I truste to speake in one day or two, to 

* Rambouillet, the French Ambassador in Scotland. 



1506.] CONSPIRACY ACJAINST THE PROTESTANTS. !>1J) 

know further of these matters. 1 have no farther to trouble your 
Honour with at this time, but most humbly take my leave. 
At Edenb. the 16th of January, 1565. 

Your Honor's bounden ever at command, 

THO. RANDOLPHE. 

P^xcepte it please your Honour to chide my man from 
court, he cares not in what case he leave me both for 
money or anything else.* 



RANDOLPH TO CECIL. 

My humble duty considered. What to write of the 
present state of this country I am so uncertain by reason 
of the daily alteration of men's minds, that it makes me 
much slower then otherwise I would. 

Within these fiftene days there was some good hope that 
this Queen would have showed some favour towards the 
Lords, and that Robert Melvin should have returned unto 
them with some comfort upon some conditions. Since that 
time there are come out of France, Cleran by land, and 
Thornton by sea, the one from the Cardinal, the other from the 
Bishop of Glascowe. Since whose arrival neither can there 
be good word gotten, nor appearance of any good intended 
them, except they be able to persuade the Queue's Majesty 
our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the crown of 
England. I write of this nothing less then I know that she 
hath spoken, and by all means that she thinks best and 
doth travail to bring that to pass. 

There was a band lately devised in which the late Pope, 
th'Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke of Savoy, with 
divers Princes of Italy, and the Queen mother suspected 



* A long postscript to this letter in omitted, as containing nothing 
of much interest. 



220 QUEEN MARY AND HER LORDS. [FEB. 

to be of the same confederacy, to maintayne papistrye 
thoughout Christendome. This bande was sent out of France 
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this Quene. The copie 
wherof, remayning with her and the principall, to be returned 
verie shortly, as I heare, by Mr. Steven Wilson, a fit minister 
for such devilish devises. If the copie herof can be gotten, 
it shal be sent as conveniently I maye.* 

Monsieur Rambolet came to this towne upon Monday e. 
He spake that night with the Quene and her husband, but 
not longe. The next day he had long conference with them 
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof theie 
intreated. 

I cannot speak with any that hath any hope that there wil 
be any good done for the Lords by him, though it is said that 
he hath very good will to do to the uttermost of his power. 
He is lodged nere to the courte, and liveth upon the Quene's 
chardges. 

Upon Sonday the order is given; great means made by 
many to be present that daye at the masse. Upon Candlemas 
daye there carryed their candles with the Quene, her hus- 
bande, th'Earle of Lenox, and Earle Atholl. Divers other 
Lords have bene called together, and requyred to be at the 
masse that daye. Some have promised, as Cossells, Mongo- 
merie, Seton, Catnes ; other have refused, as Fleminge, Lives- 
ton, Lindsay, Huntley, and Bothwell: and of them all Both- 
well is stoutest, but worst thought of. It was moved in 
counsell that masse should have bene in St. Giles' Church, 
which I believe was rather to tempt men's mindes, then in- 
tended. Indeede she was of late minded agayne to send 
Roberte Melvyn to negotiate with such as she trusteth in 
amongst the Quene's Majestie's subjects, of whose good 
wills this way I trust that the brute is greater then the truthe. 
But in these matters her Majesty is too wise not in tyme to 

* There seems to be no doubt that Mary had secretly joined this 
confederacy, and that it was more particularly directed against the 
Scottish Protestants and Elizabeth. 



1566.] QUEEN MARY AND HER LORDS. 221 

beware and provide for the worst. Some in that country 
are thought to be privy unto the bands and confederacy of 
which I have written, whereof I am sure there is something, 
though perchance of all I have not heard the truth. 

In this court dyvers contentions, quarrels, and debates ; 
nothing so much sought as to maintain mischief and dis- 
order. David* yet retains still his place, not without 
heart grief to many that see their sovereign guided chiefly 
by such a fellow. 

The Queen hath utterly refused to do any good to my 
Lord of Argile, and it is said that that shall be the first 
voyage that she will make after that she is delivered. Of her 
being with child, the brute is common that she is, but 
hardly believed of many. And of this I can assure you, that 
there have of late appeared some tokens to the contrary. 

Two of the Hawles, the best of those that lately lop out 
of England, are suitors here for support and comfort. What 
answer they shall get as yet I know not. My Lord of Ar- 
gel and Shane O'Neil have met and accorded to take each 
other's part. 

I trouble your Honour no further at this time, but most 
humbly take my leave. At Edinburgh, the 7th of February, 
1565. 

Your Honor's bounden always to command, 

THO. RANDOLPHS. 



THE BISHOP OF DURHAM.f TO CECIL. 
Gratia etpax. I received your Honor's letters in the behalf 

* Rizzio. 

f James Pilkington, descended of a good family in Lancashire, being 
third son of James Pilkington, of Rivington, in that county. He 
sought refuge in Germany during Mary's reign. On his return, after 
the accession of Elizabeth, he was elected master of St. John's Col- 
leg, Cambridge,and was made Bishop of Durham on the 2d March, 
1560. He died in 1576. 



000 THEM NEWCASTLE COAL TRADE. [.MARCH, 

of Richard Gascoin for certain coole mines* which he dames to 
be his, and I say , nay . Your wisdom knowes, that men will allege 
for their owne commoditie more than will be proved true ; 
but I trust your Honor hais not hitherto taken me with any 
forged informations. I grant he hais a gift from one of the 
Bishops, but not confirmed by the Dean and Chapter that 
yet can be sene : but with in the same bounties th'Erle of 

* The history of the coal-trade is a curious subject. The trade of 
Newcastle might be traced to a tolerably remote date. A letter in 
the Sadler Papers talks of sending for Newcastle colliers to work the 
mines at the siege of Leith in 1560. Haynes has printed a draught by 
Cecil, dated 7th August, 1563, entitled " Memoryall at Wyndsor 
contra Gallos/' wherein one proposition for injuring the French is, 
" To prohibitt the carriyng of New-Castle coles to the French." In 
a very early black-letter tract of the Cryes of London, preserved in 
the Pepysian library, one cry is " Coles, good coles, one peny a 
bushel." In MS. Lansdowne, No. 107, p. 89, is the following draught, 
drawn up between 1560 and 1570, which is curious as giving us an 
incident in the life of the famous navigator, Martin Frobisher. From 
an early period our navy seems to have been furnished with able 
sailors from the Newcastle collieries. 
" For the measuring of Sea-Cole at Newcastle. The effect of the Bill. 

"Of the greate deceit that is used aboute the measuring of sea 
coalesinNew-Castell and elsewhere throughout Yorkeshire, by the bell- 
men and others, whereby her Majestie's subjects are greatly deceived, 
and the pryses therof greatly enhaunced to the greate damage of manie 
of her Majestie's subjectes. That it would please your Majestic of your 
princely goodnes,tograunte your letters patents to Martyn Furbusher, 
gentleman, and Richarde Morley, of London, gentleman, for the mea- 
suring of all such sea-coales as are there sold or to be sold or layden, 
and to have for a chawtherne measuringe fower pence, two pence of 
the buyer, and two pence of the seller : to commence, &c. 

The Newcastle coals were then termed sea-coals. A century later, 
Fuller speaks of coal-mines in Leicestershire, Shropshire, and War- 
wickshire, and divides coal into three sorts. "One may observe 
a threefold difference in our English coale. 1. Sea-coale, brought 
from Newcastle. 2. Land-coale, at Mendip, Bedworth, &c. aud 
carted into other countries. 3. What one may call river or fresh, 
water coale, digged out in this county, (Shropshire,) at such a distance 
from Severne, that they are easily ported by boat into other shires." 



15(>().] BISHOP OF 1MKHA.M AND HIS COAL-PITS. 223 

Northumberland and the Lord Lumlei,* and other three 
freeholders have land, and pay me yearly a free rent, and Mr. 
Gascoin himself too for one parcel within the same. 
Mr. Gascoin also within the same boundary hais one of his 
own mines that is my copyholder. My predecessor fifty 
years since let a cole-pitt within the same waste, as many 
yet living can testify, and have scene. Th'Erle of Westmore- 
land that married his motherf made a great a doe of late to re- 
cover it : but after he understood the truth of it, he let the 
matter slip. 

These four years they have desired to have our counsel 
on both sides to talk of it : the day and place were appointed, 
and they refused to talk, being present. His wife's friends 
of late have misused both me and my men, that can give eve 
dence in it, with very big and uncomely words, but I cannot 
leve so great a piece of ground for brags. 

My Lord of Westmoreland, my Lord Evers,J and I have 
had like controversies. They required our counsels might 
talk of them, and in so doing they showed so gut matter, 
that all was ended. 

I require the like of them, but it will not be ; and because 
they have sought favour at your Honor's hand, he is not in 
England who I can be better content to hear the matter than 
your Honour. If I doe him wrong, all these other holders doe 
him wrong too, for they lie within his boundary, yet nothing 
is said to them. 

I trust not, Godd willing ! to live the day to doe the 
simplest living any wrong ; and to this day I trust the world 
cannot charge me. I love not law, and yet, I praise Godd ! 
law never went against me. 

I have sent your Honour such conclusions as be disputed at 

* John Lord Lumley, of Lumley Castle, Durham. 

t Henry, Earl of Westmoreland, married for his second wife Mar- 
garet, daughter of Sir Roger Chumley, widow of Sir Henry Gascoigne, 
of Cadbury, near Richmond, whose son, this Richard Gascoigne, 
married a daughter of Thomas Norton, of Norton Conyers. 

+ Lord Evre of Wilton, in Durham. 



224 SIR THOMAS SMITH RECALLED. [MARCH, 

Lovain,* and sent over hither. Wise men doe mervail that 
politic can suffer such sede of sedition, althoughe for tryall of 
the doctrine it were not amisse to heare th'adversary what he 
can say, yet the doctrine being received, and the contrary 
suffered to be spredd abroade, to the troubling of the state, 
in my opinion is dangerous. Godd turn all to the best ! butt 
surely evill men picke much evil owt of such books, even 
against the politic. I wold be gladd to here what hope your 
Honor has for the restoring my detained lands : I talked with 
my Lord Treasurer for the same, and he thinkes they might 
be obtained. If I could doe any more gudd than put your 
Honor in remembrance of them, I wold : but I am now at 
the physician's commandment, that I cannot so well attend 
as I wold. Thus ever troubling your Honor, I take my leave. 
The Lord blesse you, to serve him and his church sincerely ! 
21 Martii. Yours ever, 

JA. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, though you thynk you have cause to blame me for not 
sending my brother Hobby away with more speed, yet so you 
will suspend your offence untill your coming, and heare of 
me that I will not wryte, I dare aventure to abyde your 
chyding. When he will departe, this berer shall tell you. 
This daye he hath taken his leave of her Majestic, and 
promiseth to be at the sea syde within these ten dayes at 
the fardest. 

Your servant can tell you as much as I know of the Scot- 
tish matters, which have too many circumstances to be put 
in wrytyng. God send some other success than what they 
portend ! I am in dowt to which of the partyes I should wish 

* Where was one of the chief seminaries of the English refugee 
priests, who were continually printing books against Elizabeth, which 
were secretly distributed in England. 



1566.] SIR HENRY SYDNEY SENT TO IRELAND. 225 

such victory as percase in their heats they covet, and yet 
I cannot thynk evil of the Erie of Murray. I see the sub- 
jests brought to desperation, and the Prince into indignation. 

It was full time that Sir H. Sydney went into Ireland, for 
he hath found all out of joint there. The good subjects in 
all parts oppressed, the Irish bearing rule, but in all no 
peril, saving in Shan, who will (he saith in his dronkenes) 
be Lord or King of Ulster ; but I trust his head shall be from 
his shoulders before any crown can be made ready to make 
him either King or Erie. Whatsoever my Lord of Kildare 
did before this deputy's coming, now we are assured that he 
doth and will continue to do notable service against this 
rebel O'Neyle, against whom, because we wold advisedly 
proceed, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain goes over to confer with 
the Lord Deputy, and in the meantime we send treasure 
afore-hand. We have cause to fear that O'Neyle's boldness 
is fed out of Scotland. 

Of my Lord of Leicester's absence, and of his return of 
favour to others here, if your man tell you the tales of court or 
city, they be fond and many untrue. Briefly I affirm, that 
the Quene's Majesty may be, by malicious tongs, not well 
reported, but in truth she herself is blameless, and hath no 
spot of evil intent. Many, there may lack specially in so 
busy a world circumspections to avoid all occasions. 

The matter of Charles * is of her surely minded, but the 
progress therein hath many letts. My Lord of Norfolk hath 
showed himself a very noble man and wise. The matter is 
also much allowed of the nobility. God direct the Quene's 
Majesty to marriadg in some place, for otherwise her regiment 
will prove very troublesome and unquiet. 

And so having nothing worth writing that I have not 
committed to your servant Barloo, I end. 26 Martij. 1566. 
Yours as you know, assured, 

W. CECIL. 

* The Archduke Charles of Austria, who was making advances 
of marriage to Elizabeth. 

VOL. I. y 



226 SCOTLAND. MURDER OF RIZZIO. [MARCH, 



THE EARL OF BEDFORD AND RANDOLPH TO THE COUNCIL 
OF ENGLAND.* 

May it please your Honors, Hearing of so manie matters 
as we do, and fynding suche varietie in the reportes, we 
have muche ado to decerne the veritie, which maketh us 
the slower, and loather to put any thinge in wrytinge, to 
th'intente we wolde not that your Honors, and by you the 
Quene's Majestic, our soveraigne, sholde be advertised but 
of the verie truthe as nere as we can possiblie. To this ende 
we thoughte goode to sende up Captaine Carewe, who was 
in Edenbourghe at the tyme of the laste attemptate, who 
spake there with dyvers, and after that with the Queue's 
self and her husbande. Conforme to that which we have 
learned by other, and knowe by his reporte, we fynde the 
same confirmed by the parties self that were there pre- 
sent, and assisters unto those that were executers of the 
acte. 

Thys we finde for certayne, that the Queue's husband 
being entred into a vehement suspicion of David, f that by 
hym somethynge was commytted which was moste agaynst 
the Queue's honor, and not to be borne of his parte, fyrste 
communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding 
his sorrowes so greate, sought all the meanes he coulde to 
put some remedie to his grief, and communicating the same 
unto my Lord Ruthen by the King's commaudement, no 
other waye could be founde than that David sholde be taken 
out of the waye. Wherein he was so erneste, and daylie 

* This interesting and circumstantial letter redounds very little to 
the credit of the Queen of Scots, and therefore, apparently, it was not 
printed by Keith. The impudence with which Mary, in her passion, 
avows and justifies her criminal connection with Rizzio, and the brutal 
and at the same time contemptible behaviour of Darnley, form a pic- 
ture of wickedness and cruelty, such, as Von Raumer with, reason ex- 
claims, that " few scenes in the history of the world can be compared 
with it." 

t David Rizzio. 



1566'.] MIUDKR OF K1XXJO. 

pressed the same, that no rest could be had until it was 
put in execution. To this it was found good that the 
Lord Morton and Lord Lindesaye should be made privy, to 
th'intente that theie might have their friends at hand if 
need required, which cawsed them to assemble so many as 
theie thought sufficient against the time that this determi- 
nation of theirs should be put in execution, which was de- 
termined the 9th of this instant, three days before the 
parliament should begin, at what time the said Lords 
were assured that th'erles Argile, Murray, Rothes, and their 
accomplices should have been forfeited, if the King could not 
be persuaded through this means to be their friends, who 
for the desire he had that his intent should take effect 
th'one way, was content to yield without all difficulty to 
the other, with this condition, that theie would give their con- 
scents that he might have the crown matrimonial 

He was so impatient to see these things he saw, and were 
daily brought to his ears, that he daily pressed the said 
Lord Ruthen that there might be no longer delay e ; and to 
th'intent it might be manifesto to the world that he approved 
the act, was content to be at the doing of it himself. Upon 
the Saturday, at night, ne'er unto eight of the clock, 
the King convey eth himself, the Lord Ruthen, George 
Duglas, and two other, thorough his own chamber, by the 
privy stairs up to the Quene's chamber, joining to which 
there is a cabinet about twelve foots square, in the same a 
little lowe reposing bed, and a table, at the which there 
were sitting at the supper the Queue, the Lady Argile, and 
David, with his cap upon his head. Into the cabinet 
there comes in the King and Lord Ruthen, who willed David 
to come forth, saying that there was no place for him. The 
Queen said that it was her will. Her husband answered 
that it was against her honour. The Lord Rulheii said that 
he should learn better his duty, and offering to have taken 
him by the arm, David took the Queen by the Jblightes of 
her gown, and put hymsolfo behind the Queen, who 

Q -2 






228 MURDER OF RIZZIO. [MARCH, 

wolde gladly have saved hym, but the King having loosed 
his hands, and holding her in his armes, David was thruste 
o\vte of the cabinet thorowe the bed-chamber, into the cham- 
ber of presence, where were the Lord Morton and Lord 
Lindesaye, who intending that night to have reserved hym, 
and the next day to hang hym, so manie being abowte 
them that bore hym evill will, one thruste hym into the 
bodie with a dagger, and after hym a greate many other, 
so that he had in his bodie above sixty wounds. It is tolde 
for certayne that the King's owne dagger was lefte sticking 
in hym ; whether he struck hym or not, we cannot knowe for 
certayne. He was not slayne in the Queue's presence as 
was saide, but going down the stayres owte of the chamber 
of presence. 

Ther remayned a longe tyme with the Quene, her husbande 
and the Lord Ruthen. She made, as we heare, greate interces- 
sion that he sholde have no harme. * She blamed greatlye 
her husbande, that was the author of so fowle an acte. It is 
sayde that he dyd answer, that David had more companie of 
her body than he, for the space of two moneths, and there- 
fore, for her honor and his owne contentement he gave his 
consent that he shold be taken awaye. " It is not," sayth 
she, " the woman's parte to seeke the husbande, and there- 
fore in that the faulte was his owne." He said, that when he 
came, she either wolde not, or made herselfe sicke. " Well," 
sayth she, " you have taken your laste of me and your fare- 
well." " That were pittie," sayth the Lord Ruthen, "he is 
your Majestic' s husbande, and you must yelde duetie to cache 
other." " Why may not I," sayth she, " leave hym as well 
as your wife did her husbande ? Other have done the 
like." 

The Lord Ruthen saide that she was lawfullie divorced 
from her husbande, and for no suche cause as the king found 

* " It is our parts rather to passe this matter over in silence, than to 
make anye suche rehersall of things committed unto us in secret, but 
we know to whom we wryte, and above all things to your wisedoms." 



1566.] MURDER OF RIZZIO. 229 

himself greeved. Besides, this man was mean, base, enemy 
to the iiobilitie, shame to her, and destruction to her Grace's 
country. " Well," saith she, "it shall be dear blude to some of 
you, if his be spilt." " God forbid," saith the Lord Ruthen, 
" for the more your Grace show yourself offended, the world 
will judge the worse." 

Her husband this time speaks little. Her Grace con- 
tynuallie weeps. The Lord Ruthen being evil at ease and 
weak, calls for a drink, and saith, " This I must do with 
yourMajestie's pardon," and persuades her iiithe best sort 
he could, that she would pacific herself. 

In this mean time there rose a cumber in the court, to pa- 
cine which there went down the Lord Ruthen, who went 
straight to the Earls Huntlye, Bothwell, and Ethel, to 
quiet them, and to assure them from the King, that nothing 
was intended against them. Theie notwithstanding taking 
fear when theie heard that my Lord of Murray would be 
there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntlye and 
Bothwell got out of a window, and so depart. Ethel had 
leave of the King, with Flyske and Landores, (who was 
lately called Lyslaye, the parson of Ovne), to go where they 
would ; and being conveyed out of the court by the Lord 
Liddingeton, theie went that night to such places where 
theie thought themselves in most saulftie. 

Before the King left tawlke with the Queen, in the hear- 
inge of the Lord Ruthen, she was content that he should lye 
with her that night. We know not how he forslowe ' himself, 
but came not at her, and excused himself to his friends that 
he was so sleepy that he could not wake in due time. 

There were in this compaynie two that came in with the 
King, th'one Andrew Car of Fawsensyde, who, the Queen 
says, would have stricken her with a dagger, and one Pa- 
trick Balentyne, brother to the justice clerk, who also, her 
Grace saith, offered a dagge 2 against her belly with cock 

1 Let himself be overcome by sloth. 2 A kind of pistol. 



230 MARY ESCAPES FROM THE CONSPIRATORS. [MARCH, 

down. We have bene ernestly in hande with the Lord 
Ruthen to knowe the veritie, but he assureth us of the con- 
trarie. There were in the Queue's chamber the Lorde Roberte, 
Arthur Ersken, one or two other. These at the fyrste offering 
to make some defence, the Lord Ruthen drew his dagger, 
andjfewe mo weapons than that were not drawne nor seen in 
her Grace's presence, as we are by the saide Lord assured. 

The nexte daye, aboute seven of the clocke after noone, 
ther arrived the Earle of Murraye and th'other withhym that 
were in England. He spake immediately with the King, and 
straight after with the Quene. She sayde that he was wel- 
come, and layde the faulte upon other, that he was owte of 
the countrye, requyred of hym to be a good sub jecte, and she 
wold be to hym as he oughte. The next daye he spake with 
her agayne, as also my Lord of Morton and Lord Ruthen, 
who exhorted her humblye to caste off her care, to study for 
that which might be her safetie, weale, and honor, promising 
for their parts obedience and service as becomed true and 
faithfull subjects. She accepted theire sayings in good 
worthe, wylled them to devyse what mighte be for their 
securitie, and she wolde subscribe it. She sendeth for the 
Lord of Liddingeton, and in gentle words deviseth with hym 
that he wolde persuade that she might have her libertie, and 
the garde that was about her removed, seeing that she had 
graunted their requests. He founde it verie good, and not 
manic of the Lords, as we here, that myslyked it. All men 
being gone to their lodgings, and no suspicion taken of any 
that either she wolde departe, or not perform the promise to 
the Lords, abowte twelve of the clocke at night she con- 
veied herself a private waye oute of the house, she, her hus- 
bande, and one gentlewoman came to the place where Arthur 
Ersken and the captayn of her garde kepte the horses, and so 
rode her waye behynde Arthur Ersken untyll she came to 
Seton. There she tooke a horse to herself and rode to 
Dombarre, to the castle, whither resorted unto her the 



1566.] THE CONSPIRATORS FLY. 231 

Lords Huntley and Bothewell, and so dyvers of the whole 
country. 

The Lords being thus disappointed, sent the next day 
the Lord Simple to her Grace with request from their Lord 
ships unto her Majestic to fulfil her promise, to sign that 
bill for their security. He was differed two or three days, 
until such time as divers of the Lords (of the which 
the Earl of Glencairne was the first, the Earl Rothese 
next, and some other) by secret means had gotten their re- 
mission and were fully restored, who breaking from the 
rest, as their force diminished, so did her Grace's increase, 
and where before theie were able to have at the castle de- 
fended themselves, theie were fain to seek their own 
saulftie. 

To this also the slow coming of the Earl of Argile was 
a great impediment, who being not yet come to Edenbourgh, 
did put no small dowte lest that he would follow the same 
way which Glencarne and Kothes had done. The Earl 
Morton and Lord Ruthen finding themselves left by the 
King for all his fair promises, bonds, and subscriptions, 
and seeing the other fall from them, (saving the Earl of 
Murray, and such as were of the last enterprise,) thought 
best to provide for themselves, and so every one of them 
take their several way, where theie think that theie may 
be most at ease or suertie. Whose names we send here- 
with to your Honour.* The Earl of Argile being come to 

* The following is the enclosure here alluded to : 
" The names of such as were doers and of counsel in this last at- 
temptate, committed at Edenb. the 9th of March, 1566. 

The Earl of Morton ; Lord Ruthen ; Lord Lyndesaye ; the Master of 
Ruthen ; Lord of Liddington, Secret. Mr. James Magil, Clerk of the 
Register ; Sir John Balendin ; Justice Clarke ; St. Come ; Mr. Adam 
Ersken, Abbot of Combuskenethe ; Lard of Drumwhastle, called 
Conyngham ; Lard of Cars, Montethe'; Lard Balvarde, Murray ; 
Lard of Loughleven ; his brother that married the heirs of Bouchan ; 
Andrew Carre of Fawdensyde ; Ormeston ; Brimstone; Elpheston ; 
Hauton ; Cater ; Streuehaukc ; Patrickc Balcntinc ; Whittingham ; 



232 THE KING DESERTS THE LORDS. [MARCH, 

Lythecowe, my Lord of Murraye with his frends go to hym. 
Abowte the tyme that the Lords left Edenbourgh, the Quene 
departed from Dombar towards it. She enterde the towne 
abowte three thousand persons, all men being commanded 
to attend upon her Grace at her pleasure. The noblemen and 
beste able remayne yet there. She lodgeth not in the Abbaye, 
but in a house in the towne, in the Hye Streate, and yester- 
daye removed to one other nearer the castle and larger. The 
nexte daye after her arrivall, she sendeth the parson of Flyske 
to Lythecowe, with conditions to my Lords Argyle, Murraye, 
and the reste, which being by them founde sufficient for their 
saulftie, with restitution to their lands and goods, have ac- 
cepted, with these restrayntes, not for a space to come iiere 
the courte, nor yet to be sutors for those that committed the 
laste attemptate. The Kinge hath utterlie forsaken them, and 
protested before the counsell that he was not consenting to the 
death of David, and that it is sore agaynst his wyll : he wyll 
neither mayntayne them nor defende them. Whereupon the 
nexte daye publicke declaration was made at the marquet 
crosse of Edenbourgh, the 21st of this instante, agaynste the 
Lords, declaringe the King's innocence in that matter. 

As manie as were at this acte or of counsell, are summoned 
to underlye the lawe upon Fridaye next. Divers of them are 
oute of the countrye, as my Lord of Morton, the Lord 
Ruthen, his sone, and Andre we Car. The Lord of Lindesaye 
is either with my Lord of Argile, or within the Lord AthaFs 
bounds, where also it is saide that my Lord of Liddingeton is, 

Patrick Murray of Tibbere-moore ; Tho. Scott, Under Sherif of Stre- 
theme ; Larde of Carrnichell j Andrewe Conyngham, sone of the Erie 
ofGlancarne; Mr. Andrewe Haye ; Mr. Archibalde Duglas ; George 
Duglas, uncle to the King ; Alex. Ruthen, brother to the Lord Ruthen. 

All these man of good livings, besides a number of other gentlemen. 

Imprisoned the Larde of Domlangricke, in Edenbourg Castle; the 
Larde of Wetherborne, in Donbar Castle ; the Provoste of Glene- 
louden, sone to Doml. in the Blacknese. 

The Erie of Lenox commanded from the courte. 



1566.] THE QUEEN PROSECUTES THE CONSPIRATORS. 233 

of whom we here that he has accepted a charge from the 
Queue to enter himself prisoner in Inverness. He was par- 
ticipant of this last counsel!, discovered by the Kinge's self, 
as all the rest were that he knew. Domlaneriche is in the 
castle of Edinbourg, a soon of his in the Blackness, the Lard 
of Wetherborne, a Hume of good living, in Dombarre, of 
which now we hear that my Lord of Bothewell has the 
keeping, and is entered into all the lands that the Lord of 
Lidingeton had in possession. The parson of Flick is made 
clerk of the register : where himself is we know not ; his 
wife put out of the hows, and it spoiled, given in prey to 
the soldiers. Who shall be secretary we know not, but the 
Lord of Liddingeton having such friendship with my Lord of 
Ethel, is thought that he shall do well enough. The justice 
clerk rather suspected for his brother, than that he can be 
accused to have been of this practyse, yet as we hear his 
office is given away. Divers of the town, honest men, 
committed to prison, and divers escaped. Besides her 
guard, she has three hundred soldiers in wages, which are 
paid by the town, who find the burdayn great, and ex- 
tremitie such, as under the Frenchemen their lives were 
never so sore. 

The Queen has caused a band to be made, and will that 
all men that are friends to any of those that w r ere privy to 
David's death shall subscribe to pursue them, and do their 
uttermost to apprehend them and bring them to the place 
of justice. Some have subscribed, other have refused, and as 
we here that is the cause of the imprisonment of Domlaneriche 
and his soon, who came to the town two days after the 
death of David. 

Of the great substance he had, there is much spoken. 
Some say in gold to the value of two thousand pounds 
sterling. His apparel was very good ; as it is said, fourteen 
pair of velvet hose. His chamber well furnished : armour, 
dogs, pystoletts, harquebusses, twenty two swords. Of all 
this nothing spoiled, nor lacking, saving two or three dogs. 



234 MORTON AND DOUGLAS REACH ENGLAND. [MARCH, 

He had the custodie of all the Queue's letters, which all 
were delivered unlocked upon. We heare of a Jewell that he 
had hanging aboute his necke of some price, that cannot be 
hearde of. He had upon his backe, when he was slayne, a 
nyghte gowne of Damaske furred, with a sattayne doublet, 
and hose of russet velvet. 

Because you, Mr. Secretarie, in your letter of the 20th, re- 
quired that you might be advertised by me, Randolphe, at 
good length with the circumstances of those things that were 
done at that tyme, and of the speeches betwene the Quene 
and them, your Honors shall receave all that hytherto we have 
hearde, having conferred the reports from abroode, which 
came to our knowledge, with the sayings of these noble- 
men, the Lord Morton and Lord Ruthen, that are present, 
and of them all that which we have founde neareste to the 
truthe, or as we believe, the truthe self, have here put them 
in wryting, not having at this tyme so muche care howe 
longe we trouble you with the reading, nor howe homely 
theie are put together, but wylliiig to our-uttermoste power 
to informe you the truthe, leaving the judgement of the 
matter itself to your wysedomes. It may please your Honors 
farther to knowe, that there arrived here upon Mondaye laste 
the Earle of Morton, that came in by the weste borders, and 
with him George Duglas. His Lordship and my Lord 
Ruthen have bothe wrytten to your Honors, being advised 
thereunto by my Lord of Murraye, and mynd verie shortelie 
to make full declaration of their whole cause, howe it pro- 
ceded from the begynning to thys tyme of their arrival here. Be- 
sydes these which are here, not above ten or twelve persones, 
it is thought that other shortlye wyll repayre into the countrie, 
for that we heare that they are sharpely pursued, their howses 
and goods possessed, and themselves very earnestly sought for. 
We have no farther at this tyme to wryte unto your Honors, 
saving we heare for certayne that the Earle of Lenox is 
commanded from the courte, in what sorte or whither yet 
we knowe not. We see no force intended by the subjects 



1566.] TROUBLES IN BRABANT. 235 

towards their Sovereign, but a patient will to endure this 
fortune until it please God to make it better. The Lord 
Ruthen is very sick and keeps most his bed. 

Thus having lunge troubled you, for the desire we have 
in all things to satisfy you, though we^ had good will in 
some things to have been sparer, in special for the speeches 
between the Queen and her husband, we tayke our leaves. 
At Berwick, the 27th of March, 1566. 

Your .Honor's most assured, 

F. BEDFORD. 
THO. RANDOLPHS. 

My Lord of Murray by a special servant sent unto us 
desires your Honors' favour to these noblemen, as his dere 
friends, and such as for his sake hath given this adventeur. 



CECIL TO SIR THOMAS SMITH. 

Sir, your letters last brought were of the 27th of March, 
for the which I thank you, because I see you have left your 
brawling with me, and as one even wearied therewith you have 
patiently offred to follow the Queue's Majestie's direction for 
coming or tarrying. To such God I see provideth remedy, 
for my brother Hobby was at Calls on Monday last, so now 
your delyvery approaches, as his journey will increase. The 
bearer hereof, Mr. Thornton, not unknown to you, comes 
about affairs meet for his creditt. 

In Brabant* hath been some appearance of troubles to foal 
low, but I thynk, seeing the King and the Regent affirm that 
they meant to have no inquisition, the nobility and people 
will be therewith satisfied, and lyve in some quietness, though 
not without caution, and hereof I think the King will seek 
occasion to come into that country. 

I pray you when you come by Pariss, if any books be newly 
set out, of genealogies or of armoryes, remember me ; and I 
can but thank you. 

* The troubles in the Netherlands were now beginning. 



236 AFFAIRS OF IRELAND. [APRIL, 

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain goeth into Irland to conferr with 
the Deputy about thyngs there out of tune. 

The Erie Murray, Argyle, &c. of the first attempt are 
receaved to favor. Morton, Rythen, &c. for kylling of David, 
are yet in danger of forfaytur. llth Aprilis, 1566. 

Yours assured, 

W. CECILL. 

If ye shall send or shall come in tyme, I pray you helpe 
me to some sedes. 



BISHOP OF MEATH* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Iremayne, my singular good Lord, as unspotted of mypro- 
mes towards your Lordship, neither will give place to any of 
your well willers in this land, more duetifullie to my abilitie 
to behave myselfe towardes you or yours, whatsoever fro- 
ward report, which seldome saith well, hath said to the 
contrarie. If at any time my tong hath spoken, or my penne 
did write anything to the prejudice of your Honor, or violating 
of that I professed towardes you, having indifferent hearing, 
let me be condemned for an unconstant man, and never re- 
ceaved to your favour agayne ; if not, but rather my affection 
daily increasing with continuall prayer I might stand you or 
yours in any steade, why should it not greve me to see the 
rest here receive letters of some trust, but myselfe shutt out of 
dores, besides some talke holdeth had with me, whereby I 
might easilie gather your Lordship to have conceaved some 
mistrust. But I hope your good nature even of mere justice 
will either name the answere together with the accusation, (if 
any be,) or else receiving this my purgation, bring me out of 
doubt, protesting before the Lord Jesus Christ, with the tes- 
timonie of my conscience, you are the nobleman in this world 
whom I most honour, and whom during my life I will serve 

* Hugh Brady, the first Bishop of the See appointed by Elizabeth, 
after it had been vacant three years. He was elected in 1563, and 
died in 1583. 



1566.] TROUBLES IN IRELAND. 237 

with all possible duty, requiring most humbly your good Lord 
ship will bring me out of doubt of your favour towards me. 

And now somewhat of our state here. On Monday next 
it is agreed the Lord Deputy, with the rest of the counsel, 
accompanied, as it is thought, with a nine hundred or a 
thousand horses, &c. go to Dundalk,* and in some place of 
those borders to meet O'Nele, his coming for aught I can 
see as uncertain as the place ; but most certain if he comes, 
to be such a disordered cumming as I fear me neither will be 
profitable nor honourable ; but thereof as it shall fall out, so 
will I, by God's grace, certify your Lordship. Sundry great 
outrages are daily by him committed, as of late in Macguier's 
country,f the other day in O'Donele's country, putting to 
death most cruelly great number of men, and taking O'Do- 
nelle's brother, but since putting him to death, spoiling also 
certain of Sir Nicholas Bagnolde's J lands, with much more 
than I now think good to speak of. His tyranny joined 
with his pride is intolerable, daily increasing in strength 
and credit, with admiration and fear of the Irishrie. The 
end whereof, (if I be not deceived,) will touch the favourers, 
or rather winkeres, at his proceedings, and discharge some 
that simply hath told what end wold ensue of the same. And 
thus much of O'Nele. 

O'Raigli that now is, met my Lord Deputy at Athboi, 
being on his progress, which he took in hand the first weke 
of Lent, and ended the same the Wednesday before Easter, 

* The Lord Deputy (Sir Henry Sydney) did not go to Dundalk till 
the latter end of July, when O'Neil was up in arms. 

t " Maguire, the Captain of Fermanaughe, has been of late in- 
voted by O'Neill, and totally expulsed out of his country." Sir H. 
Sydney to Cecil, 9th June, 1566. " O'Neill fortefyeth strongly the 
castles won of O'Donell and Maguire." Sir H. Sydney to Cecil, June 
24, 1566.- Sydney Papers. 

J Sir Nicholas Bagnoll was Marshall of Ireland during the govern 
meant of Sir Henry Sydney. 

O'Reilly was a near kinsman of Maguire, but a partisan of 
O'Neil. 



238 TROUBLES IN IRELAND. [APRIL, 

where submitting himself to th'ordre of such commissioners 
as my Lord should appoynt, hath by the same commissioners 
awarded agaynst hym and his cuntry, as much (if I be not 
deceaved) as all the Breni is worth, but never one groat 
awarded to him, although his chalenge against the Earle of 

Kyldare, the bastard, with the rest of the pale, unto 

eight or nine thousand kine, which will make him, I fear me, 
desperate, ready rather to rebell, than by losing all, to be- 
come with his a begger. For the manner of ordering his 
cuntry, he passeth all that went before him. 

The O'Mores with Sieve Nugent are, after much harme 
done by them, now taken in, but of Terelle's seven hundereth 
kine not one restored. Some of the other Mores that were 
with Peres Grac are also come in, the rest be as it were haist 
loking what O'Nele will do. 

Sir Warham Sentleger, * together with Baron Cusake and 
White, of Waterford, are in the west. Of their proceedings I 
can as yet say little. 

The Earl of Desmondf hath married the Lord of Douboin's 
daughter ; but why do I trouble your Lordship with such 
frivolous matter ? The counsell there sent unto me by one 
Oliver Sutton a letter, willing me to say my knowledge con- 
cerning a certain booke exhibited by the said Oliver to her 
Majestic. I will, by Gode's help, say freely what I know, 
and yett I feare to small purpose if it be heard with a deafe 
eare. Being desirous to know somewhat in what tearmes your 
Lordship and the Lord DeputieJ stood in, I presumed upon 
some sett occasion here had to enter thereof some talke, 
who, in the ende saide " Suerly, my Lord, I am sorry it is not, 

* Sir Warham Saint Ledger was Lord President of Minister. Sir 
Henry Sydney says of him, at this time, " Doubtles, he is an honest 
and a sufficient man." Sydney Papers. 

t Gerald-Fitzgerald, the 16th Earl, who lost his life in rebellion, 
" Ingens rebellibus exemplar," married for his second wife Eleanor, 
daughter of Edmond, Lord Dunboyne, who shared with him his many 
escapes and privations. 

+ Sydney was a friend and partisan of Leicester. 



1566.] ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN. ->39 

and wish it were otherwise between us then it is ; but I trust 
it will be better, and in the meantime I will deal with any 
shall appertain unto him in such sort as the world shall 
see me void of affection, but rather do them the good I 
may." " Verily, my Lord," quoth I, " and so it shall beseme 
you right well to do," but yet I fear me poor Adam, if he be 
taken, goes to the gibbet : he is already indicted and laid for 
to be tried. 

It is so, my Lord the Archbishop of Dublin is sent for hence, 
I think through your Lordship's help, whereof my Lord De- 
putie told me, asking me if I wold have him write in my be- 
half. To whom after I had given thanks, I pried him he wold 
so do, whiclrnow he hath done to the Earl of Leicester and 
Mr. Secretary. If there be any let, it will be in Mr. Secre- 
cairo, who I fear hath received sad sinister report of me, 
and yet neither by word nor writing have I received any such 
knowledge, whereof I most humble beseech your Lordship, if 
any such be, to certify me of it, and not only to remove the 
same, but also to prefer my suite begun by Lord Deputy, 
which, if he had not offered, should only be laid upon your- 
self, and yet begun by him, I know never will come to 
good effect unless it be by yourself. Even as I doubt not 
of your Lordship's favour herein, so I pray God increase 
your Honour. From Dublin, this 27th of April. 

Your Lordship's most humble during life, 

H. MlDEN. 

I will very shortly write again, and then say somewhat of 
Ardnold.* 



THOMAS WALDEGRAVE TO THOMAS CLOPTON.f 

Sir, My brother and myself have gotten a tarsell sent for 
you of Sir Robert Gardiner. By reason of the wars and 

* Sir Nicholas Arnold, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland in 15(J3. 
f Styled, in the superscription, " Of Kentwell, in Suffolk." 



240 SHANE O'NEIL IN ARMS. [AUG. 

troubles of this lande, hawkes be very scarce, and not to be 
come by for money ; for those fewe which be, are in the handes 
of counselors and great persons. The late Earle of Terrene* 
is stronger then we, and now very lately, (since we cam out 
of the field,) there be fifteen hundred Scotts arrived out of 
Scotland to ayde him and his fellow rebells. I woulde will- 
ingly write unto you the number of the rebells, but that I 
love not to write uncertainties. I do not heare one man say 
that he can justly tell their forces : this is most certayne, 
that they be one thousand horse stronge, and as the wiser 
sort conjecture, not above four or five thousand foote, be- 
fore they had this last supply of Scottes out of Scotland: 
so that now they be generally numbered six or seven thou- 
sand men ; and yet they never appeared to us all the last 
journey, I meane not within our viewe, above fifteen hun- 
dred, or two thousand at the most ; and that day we hadd the 
chasing of them foure or five good miles, but for wante of 
guides we cold never gett between them and their fastness, so 
that we took not above seven footmen and one horseman. 
One O'Hannlin, an Irish knight, (her Majestie's standard- 
bearer,) was shot in the ancle, who was our only guide to 
that place, which misfortune did save a number of their lives. 
We be now going into the field agayn. 

Thus after my commendations to you and both my good 
sisters, and to all your little ones, I take my leave. From 
Dublin, this first day of August. 

Your loving brother-in-law, 

THOMAS WALDEGRAVE. 

* Shane O'Neil, who had been raised to this title by the Queen on 
his last submission, but on his new rebellion had been deprived of it. 



1566.] DEPREDATIONS OF THE TURKS. 241 



CAPTAIN ROGER BODENHAM TO MR. ANTHONY PEN.* 

What avayleth diligence, labour, or pollice of man; if it be 
not directed by Gode's will, all is in vain. It is most cer- 
tayne that man may purpose, but God doth dispose, as now 
it has pleased God to deal with me, and turn all my joy 
into sorrow, in such wise as withowt doubt, if he gave me 
not patience to suffer it, I am not able to bear it. 

I am certain ere this come to your hands, ye have hard of 
my great misfortune. I would have written you of it long ere 
this, but that by no means I cold set my pen to the 
paper, and now God knows howl do it, and with what payne, 
only because I will satisfy you how it paste. 

The 29th day of Julij, in the morning before day, at the 
Cape Sanct Mary, being the coast of Portugal, not paste 
twenty-five leagues from Saint Livears or Codex, whither I 
was bound, even at home at my own doors, being calm with- 
owt any breathe of wind, I was besett with some galleys of 
Turks of Argell, and although the match was too much for 
me, being so few men as I had with me, yet I put myself 
in order, and I fought with them in the morning till none, 
in the which fight many of my men were slain, and all the 
rest sore hurt, so that by no means we cold make any 
farther defens, and so we were all taken and stripped naked 
and put into the galleys, the ship so beaten that I fear me she 
sank, for after the Turks had taken owt of her what they 
would, they left her driving in the sea, with all her ordinance 
and takell ; and although I have made much diligence in the 
search of her, I cannot find her. 

The next day after I was taken, the Turks went to 
Codex, and there made sale of certain Christians, to the 
number of a ten persons, among the which I was one, 

* This letter gives us a curious picture of the state of Southern 
Europe, when the Christians were in danger of being taken by the 
Moorish Corsairs almost in our own seas. 

VOL. I. R 






242 DEPREDATIONS OF THE TURKS. [AUG. 

and paid for my bodye seven hundred ducats, which a frend 
of myne layd owt for me, and howe I shall paye it agayn, 
God knows. All the rest he carryed away in sorowfull 
captivitie, and the greatest greef that I have of them is 
the small remedy that I fynd for theire redemption ; the 
worst of them will not be redemed with three hundred ducats. 
God sende the remedye ! The daye before I was taken, the 
same Turks toke three shipps that came owt of th'Indias, 
with above three hundred thousand ducats, and many men, 
women, and children, and more in one company twenty-two 
shipps laden with the King's provisions, and more four Bis- 
kayne ships, and four hulks, that came owt of Flanders, with 
dyvers others. The lyke was never sene in these partes, nor 
hearde of, nor I think wil be agayn. This notwithstanding, 
if the shippe do come to my handes, as I hope she shall, if 
she be not sunke, if God be pleased I maye make a voyage 
with her, I dare saye that I will save the principall of all 
men's parts, but and she be gone, there is no remedye. Whe- 
ther Water be alyve or dead, I knowe not. God helpe them 
all, for certainly how much this grieves me I am not able to ex- 
pres. I praye you let me heare from you, and the Lorde sende 
you helthe. From Sevill, the laste of Auguste, anno 1566. 

By yours, the sorrowefull, ROGER BODENHAM. 

It was never sene nor hearde that the Turks did any such 
thing in these partes, wherfore all men were owt of doubt 
of any such matter, and did not mistruste anye suche thing. 
Here is many a heavy harte, for it hathe done muche harme 
in this citty, the taking of the three shipps that came owt 
of th'Indias, and dayly they loke for the flete to come from 
thense, and the Turks be here tarying for them. 



ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH* TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your good Lordship : I am presently come 
into England by license of my Lord Deputie and counsell,to 

* Adam Loftus, consecrated to this see in 1562. 



1566.] IRELAND. O'NEIL'S LAST REBELLION. -21*3 

have some riddance, if it please God, of some tlyseases that I 
am disposed unto. I had purposed first of all to have re- 
paired to the court, but the travel of the seas so increased 
my diseases that I was coiistreyned for remedy sake to go to 
Cambridge, where I mind to remain until I have perfectly 
recovered my health, or otherwise be directed by my Lords 
of the counsel, to whom my Lord Deputy hath written of 
the needful cause of my coming hither. 

Although I dout not but your Lordship understands 
by others, the present state of Irland, which I thought it my 
duty somewhat to write to you concerning the same. O'Nele 
came to Carrack Bradoghe, the 26th of July, with three thou- 
sand men, and my Lord Deputy understanding his repair 
thither in warlike sort, assembled the whole force of the En- 
glish pale, and came to Dundalk * the 29th of July, with a very 
great force of fotemen and six hundred horse, and there mizzen 
gers passed between them, but O'Nele ulterlie refused to be 
subjected to the Queue's Majestic, unless Maguier were pre- 
sently delivered unto hyrn. My Lord Deputy continued there 
two days in the field, during which time there was some 
skirmishing between them ; but I herd not of any hurt of 
either side. My Lord Deputy with the army departed for 
want of victuals. A day or two after, O'Nele invaded the 
English pale, and burned the Haggard, and the most part 
of the towns beyond Cassinge Water, (I mean of the north 
side.) He likewise assaulted Dundalk, which was guarded 
by John Fitzwilliams and the rest of Mr. Bryan's soldiers, 
which so valiantly defended the town, that he lost three en- 
signs, seventeen of his men, and a great number died at his 
coming into the camp. He practised with the Scots, and 
offered them Clandeboy, all the whole kine in his country, 
the delyvery of Surleboy, but all in vain. The day before 1 

* See Sir Henry Sydney's own account of this affair in the Sydney 
Papers, vol. i. p. 15, which agrees closely with this narrative of the 
Archbishop of Armagh. 

K '_> 



244 DEATH OF SHANE cTNEIL. [SEPT. 

tooke shippe it was reported (and I thinke very true), that 
he encamped in Betaghes countrey, and there encountred with 
my Lord of Delvin,* and the gentlemen of Westmethe, and 
kylled certayne gentlemen of the Tutes and other of the beste 
there, f 

Th'erle of Chanrycard and McWilliam Enter, repayred 
to my Lord Deputie and counsell at Dublin, and the griefes 
between them were appeased, frendshippe compounded, and 
pledges put in on both sydes. 

Th'erle of Desmonde hathe invaded and greatly spoyled the 
Lord Fitzmoris' contrey, and now remaynes in Kerry in 
campe, with two thousand men. His obedience and good 
meaninge is dowted of J 

* Sir Christopher Nugent, 9th Baron of Delvin, who " expressed such 
forwardness and fidelity in the service of the crown, that in 1567, 
articles were made with his Lordship by the Queen, authorizing him 
to extirpate the O'Mores, sons of Ferrasse MacRosse and their follow- 
ers ; whereby it was ordered, that he should serve in person, and have 
the leading of 150 kerne, 10 horsemen and 50 boys of his own choice, 
and should intend the prosecution of that service, in all places within 
the English pale or elsewhere as it should seem to him expedient, for 
the advancing therein of her Majesty's honour, reducing of quiet to her 
good subjects, and the utter extirpation of the aforesaid rebels." 
Lodges Irish Peerage, by Archdall, i. 234. 

t The English seem to have been more successful in their practices 
with the Scots, and O'Neale failed in his hope of obtaining their alli- 
ance. He was chased from place to place, and reduced by the Lord 
President to such extremity, that he was on the point of throwing 
himself at his feet with a halter about his neck, but was persuaded by 
one of his attendants to make a last attempt on the Scots. The latter, 
who owed him a deep grudge, pretended to embrace his advances, 
invited him to a feast, where they treacherously murdered him and his 
companions, and sent his head to Dublin. Such was the bloody and 
not unmerited end of this most turbulent and faithless chieftian. 

J The Lord Deputy Sudney, in his narrative of his progress in 1567, 
gives us a most mournful picture of the state to which the country was 
reduced by the quarrels of these turbulent chieftains. " Having 
travailed," he says, " from Youghall to Cork, from Cork to Kinsale, 
and from thence to the uttermost boundes of it towards Limerick, like 



]566.] MISERABLE CONDITION OF IRELAND. 

The Lord God give your Lordship such success in all 
your affairs as your good heart can wish, and perfect know 
ledge of your friends from the contrary, and then good re- 
guard to use them accordingly. 

From Hethfelde, the third of September, 1566. 
Your good Lordship's at commandment, 

AD. ARMACHAN. 

If it please your Lordship to write to me a lyne or two, 
this bearer presently returns. 

as I never was in a more pleasant country in all my life, so never saw 
I a more waste and desolate land, no, not in the confines of other 
countries, where actual war hath continually ben kept by the 
greatest princes of Christendom. And there herd I such lamentable 
cries and doleful complaints, made by that small remain of poor 
people which yet are left, who hardly escaping the fury of the sword 
and fire of their outeragious neighbours, or the famine with the same, 
which their extorcious lords hath driven them unto, either by taking 
their goods from them, or by spending the same, by their extort 
taking of coyrie and liveries, make demonstration of the miserable 
estate of that country. Besides this, such horrible and lamentable 
spectacles there are to behold, as the burning of villages, the ruin 
of churches, the wastinge of such as have ben good towns and castles, 
yea, the view of the bones and sculls of the ded subjects, who, parte- 
lie by murder, partly by famine, have died in the fields, as in troth 
hardly any Christian with dry eyes could behold." And a little fur- 
there on : " From thence I travelled thorough a great and ancient 
town in Connoghe, called Anrye, where I was offered a pitiful and 
lamentable present, namely, the keys of the town, not as to receive 
them of me again, as all other accustomablye doe, but for me still to 
keep, or otherwise dispose at my pleasure, inasmuch as they were so 
impoverished, by the extortion of the lords about them, as they were 
no longer able to keep that town. The town is large and well 
walled, and it appears by matter of record there hath ben in it three 
hundred good householders, and since I knew this land there was 
twenty, and now I find but four, and they poor, and, as I write, 
ready to leave the place. The cry and lamentation of the poor 
people was great and pityefull, and nothing but thus, succour ! suc- 
cor ! succour !" Sydney Papers. 



246 STUKELEY IN IRELAND. [MARCH, 

QUEEN ELIZABETH TO SIR HENRY SYDNEY. 

BY THE QUEENE. 

Right trusty and well-beloved, we grete you well. There 
are two things come to our memory sithens the writing and 
closing up of our other letter, wherof we think meet to re- 
member you. The first is, that we think it not for our honour, 
but rather to th'increase of th' obstinate audacite of Shane 
O'Neyle, to have you renew any treatie with him. And 
therfor we wish rather all other good meane wer thought 
uppon to stay him or rather diminish his wicked rebelliouse 
attempts. The second is, we find it straunge that Thomas 
Stukley* shuld be used there in any service in such credit as 
we perceve he is, considering the generall discredit wherin he 
remayneth not only in our own realm, but also in other coun- 
trees for such matters as he hath ben chardged withall : wher- 
unto also he yet remayneth by bond with sureties aunswer- 
able in our Court of the Admiraltie, according as of late 
upon supplication of his sureties, we wrote to you that he 
should return home to answer in our said Court. Of 
these things being newly come to our mynd sithens the de- 
pech of our former letter, we thought briefly to make this 
short letter. Given under our signet, at our Manour of 

* Not long after the date of this letter, we still find Stukeley in Ire- 
land. " Here hath ben lately exhibited unto us a complaint/' saith 
the Queen in a dispatch to Sir Henry Sydney, July G, 1567, from the 
Kingsborough collection, tf by certen subjects of our brother the King 
of Spayne, inhabitants of the Low Contreys, against Edward Cooke 
of Southampton, a pyrat, who they alledge invaded them by sea, and 
took their goods, being hydes and skyns brought from the Inds, and a 
greate some of money, and carying the same into Irland, have made 
sale to Stewkley therof, which they requyre to be redressed. And so 
if it be true that Stewkley hath bought any part therof, we charge 
you to give streight order that the same goods be furthcoming to be 
answered where justice shall lymit. And surely we marvell that 
Stewkley wold have such boldnes as to deale with pyrates or with 
their prises." 



1567.] THE ENGLISH DEMAND CALAIS. 247 

Grenewich, the last day of March, 1567, the eight year of 



our reign.* 



MR. MANt TO CECIL. 
(15 Maij. 1567.) 

He wrote to him in his last letter of the Duke of Alva's 
going by the coast from Carthagenas to Roses ; he lost one 
galleon laden with horses and passengers, which ventured too 
far abroad, and so taken by the Moors. He was sorry that 
his letters arrived no sooner, wherein he commanded him to 
open unto the King the Queue's determination in demanding 
of Callice ; he had but three days before audience and con- 
ference with the King, durst therefore not now speak to him, 
unless he would seem to be importunate, and indeed the 
King withdrew himself into his monastery to be secret 
these fifteen days. He will stay for his further instructions 
and letters. Upon May day there was a triumph of justes 
there, eight challenging other eight, but more gay than good, 
whereunto the ambassador of France and he were invited, and 
placed next under the King. Two days after the ambassador 
of France visited him, and told him, that he had advertise 
meant from the French court, that there were looked for cer- 
taine commissioners from England to demand Callice. J He 

* Endorsed as being received on the 1 7th of April. 

t John Man, Dean of Gloucester. In a former letter .of Cecil's 
(p. 185), we have seen that on the return of Sir Thomas Chaloner, the 
English government thought an ambassador at Madrid a mere matter 
of form. It seems to have been with this feeling that the Queen sent 
them Man, a person of very small abilities, and she herself is said to 
have punned upon his mission, saying, that as the Spaniard had sent 
her a goose-man, (Guzman,) she could not return the compliment better 
than sending Man who was a goose. This article and the following 
are abstracts of letters. 

J The time was now come when, by the treaty of Cateau Cam- 
bresis, the town of Calais ought to be delivered to the English. Sir 



218 THE ENGLISH DEMAND CALAIS. [MAY, 

answered that he doubted not, but that they should be well 
used there, and also well answered, for that the dale was 
past, and no excuse why they should not restore it according- 
lie. The French embassador said to him againe, he might 
well assure himselfe his master would not depart with it, for 
that it is the peece, wherefore have risen often debates and 
warres, now, being" recovered, concord would be betwixt 
France and England. He told him againe, that he mistrusted 
not but the King and counsell there would stand unto their 
promises they had made, and bound themselves, and more 
he could not saie yet. The ambassador replied againe, that 
the commonaltie of France be so bent to keepe Callice; that 
although the King would performe and render it, they would 
not suffer him. There is no likelihood of the King's departure 
into Flanders before Michaelmasse. He understood out of 
his letters the Counte Arundel's arryval and good receiving 
into England, whereof he is verie glad. The Conte de Feria 
presumed to have a great nomber in England at his command. 
A Spanyard sitting at his table said, that the Counte de 
Feria being in England, was so beloved, that in case he 
would, he might have made himselfe King of England. 
Which, although it be an untruth, yet it argueth a confi- 
dence the Spanyards have of some great parte the Conte is 
yet able to make in England. To some like effect the am- 

Henry Norris had been sent as ambassador to France in the February 
of the present year, and in March he was followed by Sir Thomas 
Smith, who went to Calais on the 3d of April. " He demanded Calais 
first at the gates of the town next the sea, in a loud voice in French, 
by the sound of a trumpet, of which an act was presently made by a 
public notary, to which were witnesses certain outlandish merchants, 
and others there happily present. And next coming to the French 
King, he demanded Calais again, together with Sir Henry Norris, the 
other ambassador. The King remitted the matter to his council, 
where Hospital, his chancellor, and our Smith, argued the point 
largely and learnedly on both sides." Strype. It is scarcely neces- 
sary to add, that the demand of the English ambassadors was evaded 
by various quibbles, and that Calais was never given up. 



1567.] DESIGNS OF THE SPANIARDS. 249 

bassadour of Portugal spoke to him, that he doubted not, 
but at the King of Spaine's coming into Flanders, if it shall 
please his Majestic to set up apendon in England, he should 
have the greatest part of the realm to follow him at his 
devotion. This is their opinion of the people of England.* 
Since the Duke of Alva's departure thence, he negotiated 
most with Don Antonio di Toledo, whom he finds very will- 
ing to do him any pleasure he can. He means not to deal 
any further with the Conte de Feria. Sir Francys Inglefyldf 
departed thence to the Countess de Feria ; he is in some 
despair of recovery of his living out of England. The 
Marks of Burgos is at the point of death. 



MR. MAN TO THE COUNCIL. 
(13 Jun. 1567.) 

He declared unto the Conte de Feria their Lordship's and 
the whole nobility of England's grief, touching his evil 
dealing with the Earl of Arundell. He answered him very 
briefly, that it was a case of his wife wherein he had dealt, 
and not general, and that his doings therein being up 
rightly judged, ought not to be so evil taken, for that in any 
realm a particular stranger may as his occasion serves 
challenge any subject of that realm, whereof he is not borne 
himself, adding with great collar he had been and was as 
good a servant unto the Queen's Majestic as the Earl of 

* There can be little doubt, by all these vain boasts, that the King 
of Spain intended to make a descent in England, which was to be 
connected with a rebellion of the popish party. His agents had been 
busy at work, though not so successfully as he seems to have sup- 
posed. There is every reason for thinking that the Queen of Scots 
was well acquainted with this design ; and the ill-concerted northern 
rebellion of 1569, was one of the effects of the Spanish intrigues. 

t Sir Francis Englefield had been one of Queen Mary's privy council, 
had taken refuge in Flanders after the accession of Elizabeth, and had 
been taken into the pay of Spain. 



250 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [JULY, 

Arundell*, or anie other. And this was his whole answer in 
effect. Touching the latter part of their letter, Burlace, as 
he understandeth, is at Mylan, but in case he shall thither, 
or he chance to see him, he will not faile to accomplish the 
Queen's and their commandement. 



SIR NICHOLAS THROGMORTONf TO CECIL. 

Sir, according as I did wryte unto you yesterdaye, I passed 
by the French ambassadour this daye, whom I founde at 
cardes with Monsieur de Villeroye. He moved unto me, that 
it might please the Queue's Majestic, that her mynister might 
concur with suche one as the Frenche Kinge should sende into 



* Henry Fitz-Alan, tenth and last Earl of Arundel, of that family, 
a nobleman who had acted a prominent part in the public transactions 
of the three preceding reigns. He must have been abroad at this time, 
on his travels. 

+ The Queen of Scots having after the murder of her husband, and 
marriage with Bothwell, been taken by the lords, was now in the 
castle of Lochleven. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was sent to negotiate 
between the Lords and Mary, and to obtain, if possible, the liberty of 
the latter. Our correspondence on the affairs of Scotland since the 
murder of Rizzio, is not very full. Randolph had been for some time 
put under restraint, and therefore his dispatches discontinued. He 
had been afterwards recalled. 

After the murder of Rizzio, events had followed each other in Scot- 
land in quick succession. On the 19th of June, 1566, was born James 
VI., afterwards James I. of England. On the 10th of February fol- 
lowing, his father and Mary's husband, Darnley, was murdered, with- 
out doubt, by her connivance. On the 24th of April was acted the 
tragi-comedy of her rape, by Bothwell. On the 12th of May she cre- 
ated him Marquis of Fife, and Duke of Orkney ; and on the 15th of 
the same month she married him, who was universally pointed out as 
the murderer of her husband. On the llth of June they were be- 
sieged by the Lords in Borthwick. On the 15th she was taken prisoner 
at Carberry-hills, and the next day she was conveyed to Lochleven. 



1567.] MARY IN LOCHLEVEN. 251 

Scotland to procure the Queue's liberty, for that is the only 
mark I perceive they shoot at. 

And by howe much they desire that matter to proceed 
first without any other conditions, by so much the more 
me thinks her Majestic ought to qualify her affection to 
bring that to effect, until justice be done of the offenders, 
and suerty provided for the Lords : with such other things 
as shall be agreeable to the Queue's Majestie's purpose. I 
find they take it ill, that Monsieur de Villeroye was denied 
audience. Me thought by some words that the ambassa- 
dor let slip, either Monsieur de Crock were like 
enough to be stayed in Scotland upon my going, or he is 
like enough to be returned thither again upon his arrival 
at London. I showed them that the Queue's Majestic did 
send me into Scotland to comfort the Queen in this her ca- 
lamyty ; and to procure her liberty, which her Majestic did 
take for too great an indignity to be showed to a Queen by 
her subjects. I said that I looked for no better acceptance 
than Monsieur de Villeroye had amongst the Lords, and to be 
denied to have access to the Queen. They seemed to make 
no doubt of liberty to be given unto me to speak with 
her : I showed them that in case they would refuse me to 
have access, I minded to address myself to the Hamble- 
ton's, and that party which minded to set their Sovereign 
at liberty, as the thing that the Queen my mistress chiefly 
sought, though her Majestic could well allow that justice 
should be done of the murderers. This much I have 
thought meet to advertise you, to the end her Majestic and 
you may use the like speech unto them to morrow at their 
audience, if it so stand with her Majestie's pleasure and your 
liking : for I thought not good to appear any other man 
unto the French, or that her Majestic had any other de- 
signmente. There passed a packette by the way this after- 
iioone, which I did not see : and therefore it may please you 
by your next to let me know what is chanced in Scotland 
since the 27th of the last, which were the letters that I sent 



252 THROGMORTON'S MISSION TO THE LORDS. [JULY, 

you yesterday. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you 
At Ware,* this seconde of July, 1567. 

Yours to use and commande. 



THROGMORTON TO CECIL. 

Sir, as you might perceave by my letters of the 1 1th of July, 
I lodged at Fascastle that night,t accompanyed with the 
Lorde Hume, the Lorde of Ledington, and James Melvin, where 
I was intreted very well accordinge to the state of the place ; 
which is fitter to lodge prisoners then folks at lyberty. As it 
is very little, so it is very stronge. By the conference I have 
had with the Lorde of Ledington, I do fynde the Lords his 
associats and he hath left nothing unthought of which may e 
be eyther to theyr danger or worke them suertye : wherin 
they do not forgett what good and harme Fraunce may do 
them ; and lykewise they consyder the same of England. 
But, as farre as I can perceave, to be playne with you, they 
fynde more peryll to growe unto them through the Queue's 
Majestie's dealing, then eyther they do by the Frenche or 
by any contrarye faction emongst themsellfs. For they assure 
themselffs the Quene wyll leave them in the bryars, if they 
runne her fortune. And though they do acknowledge greate 
benefit, as well to them as to the realme of Englande, 
by her Majestie's doings at Lethe (wherof they saye mutu- 
ally her Majestic and both the realmes have receaved great 
fruit) ; yet, upon other accidents which have chanced sithens, 
they have observed suche things in her Majestie's doings, as 
have tended to the danger of suche as she hath dealt withall, 
to the overthrowe of your owne dessignments, and lyttle to 



* He was on his way to Scotland. 

t A strong hold of Lord Hume, which stood on a little promontary, 
a few miles north of Coldingham. 



156*7.] DESIGNS OF THE SCOTTISH LORDS. 253 

the suerty of any party. And upon these considerations 
and discourses, at length me thinks I find a disposition in 
them, that either they mind to make their bargine with 
France, or else to deal neither with France nor you, but to 
do what they shall think mete for their state and suerty, 
and to use their remedies as occasion shall move them, 
meaning neither to irritate France nor England until 
such time as they have made their bargin assurydly with 
one of you. For they think it convenyent to proceed with 
you both for a while pari passu, for that was my Lord of 
Ledington's term. 

I do perceive, they take the matter very unkindly, that 
no better answer is made to the letter which the Lords did 
send to her Majestic: and likewise that they hear nothing 
from you to their satisfaction. I have answered as well as 
I can, and have alleged their own proceedings so ob- 
scurely with the Queen, and their uncertenty, hath occasionyd 
this that is yet happened: and therefore her Majestic has 
sent me, to th'ende I may inform her thoroughly of the 
state of the matter, and upon the declaration of their minds 
and intents to such purposes as shall be by me proposed on 
her Majestie's behalf unto them, they shall be reasonably 
and resolutely answered. At these things the Lord of Le- 
dington smiled, and choke his head ; and said, " It were 
better for us, you would let us alone, then neither to do us 
nor yourselfFs good, as I fear me in the end it will prove." 

Sir, if there be any truth in Ledington, La Crocq is gone 
to procure Ramboillet's coming hither, r or a man of like 
quality, and to deliver them of their Queen for ever : who 
shall lead her life in France, in an abbey reclused : * the 

* Elizabeth has been accused of inviting the Queen of Scots to seek 
refuge in England. The following is an extract from a letter from 
Queen Elizabeth to Throgmorton, dated July 20, 1567, in the State 
Paper Office : 

" As to the last matter in your letter which we perceive you have 
understand by some secret means, that some of that counsel! which 



254 DESIGNS OF THE SCOTTISH LORDS. [JULY, 

Prince at the Frenche devotion : the realme governed by a 
councell of theyr election, as the Scottishe nation : the forts 
commytted to the custodye of suche as shall be chosen 
amongst themselffs. As yet I fynde no great lykelihode that 
I shall have accesse to the Quene : it is objected they may 
not so displease the Frenche Kynge unlesse they were sure to 
fynde the Quene of Englande agoodfrend : and when they have 
once, by my accesse to the Quene, offended the Frenche, then 
they saye youwyll make your profitt therof to theyr undoing. 
And as to the Queue's liberty, which was the first head thai 
I proposed, they sayd, that therby they did perceave that 
the Quene meant theyr undoing, for as for the rest of the 
matters, yt was but folly to talke of them, the lyberty going 
before: "but," sayd they, " if you wyll do us no good, do 
us no harme, and we wyll provide for ourselffs." In the endc 
they sayd we shoulde refuse our owne commoditie before they 
concluded with any other, which I shoulde heare of at my co- 
ming to Edinburghe. 

By my next I hope to send you the bande concluded by 
the Hambletons, Argyle, Huntlye, and that faction, not so 
muche to the prejudice of the Lords at Edenburgh as that 
which was sent into Fraunce. Thus having no more leysure, 
but compellyd to leape on horsebacke with these Lords to 



favour the Queen thinke her best ende shuld be to come into this 
realme, and to commit the government to some there, wherof also you 
think the Queen herself very disyrous herselfe to have it brought to 
passe, we cannot presently resolve of any certeyn answer thereto ; but 
wishe you (if it be moved unto you by the Quene herselfe or any 
other from her) to answer that you will therof advertise us; and so 
wold we have you do: at which tyme we shall gyve you a more direct 
answer, for we fynde her removyng either into this our realme or into 
France, not without great discommodityes to us, and yet the diffi- 
cultyes therof grow upon divers respects, as we doubt not but you can 
well consider. 

Thus much for things conteyned in your letter requyring our 
answer." 



1567.] MURRAY RETURNS FROM FRANCE. 255 

go to Edinburgh, I humbly take my leave of you. From 
Fascastle, the 12th of Julye, 1567. 



MR. JENYE TO CECIL. 

It male please you, right honourable Sir, that my Lord 
of Murray, fyndirig himselffe in some discontentment by his 
lunge delays of the French King, as also in hazard of de- 
tayning by force, beside some peril of his person by such 
as have grutcht much his affection towards England, re- 
quyred my Lord my master to assist him by some policy 
to escape secretly out of France. Whereupon I was de- 
poshed towards Deep to stay some English bark under 
some colour, for my Lord of Murray will pass in no French 
man, and if I found not an Englishman there, to hast over 
thither to Rye to provide him with all diligence, where I 
am arrived this afternoon at four of the clock, and mean 
as soon as tide and wind serves, God willing, to repair 
towards Deep again, where a messenger attends my ar- 
rival to give knowledge to my Lord of Murray at the court, 
whereby he may under an assurance of his vessel determine 
and adventure his purpose. 

The prince of Condye's sudden departure from the court, 
both with much difficulty and much mysconteiitment, as 
also other emulation in court and differences other where, 
which promises some new garble, is one particular of 
the mistrust my Lord of Murray hath of hymselffe, beside 
other causes with the rest, which I have by word of mouth to 
advertise your honour of at my arrival with you, which shall 
be, God willing, so soon as I have landed my Lord of 
Murray in what part of England soever it be. 

Thus in hast I humbly take my leave of your honour. 
From Rye, this 13th of Julie 



256 THROGMORTON'S INTERFERENCE UNSUCCESSFUL. [JULY, 

THROGMORTON TO CECIL. 

Sir, me thinketh these Lordes be 011 the way to make an 
end of theyr matters with theyr Soveraigne amongest them- 
selfs, albeyt they keepe bothe the Frenche and us in hand, 
for they cannot tell how to be rid of theyr Quene (whych I 
mystraste they intend one way or other) without the consent 
of the Frenche ; takyng them to be better inclyned to serve 
theyr humors than we ; and fyndyng they wyll thys course, 
(notwithstanding any threatenyngs of any Prynce,) I muste 
take hede we lose them not wholly, and dry ve them to be more 
French than they wold be, throughe the Queue's Majestie's 
sharpe empugning theyr designes. It wer well don to 
make a virtue of necessytie, unles her Majestic woll use armes 
ageynste them. And I see no happie end destyned unto us 
in those matters. To be playne with you, I fear the end, 
bothe for God's dyspleasure and for some unaptnes amongst 
ourselfes to enter and prosecute the warr. 

To understand what hath passed synce my laste dyspatche 
of the 14th of July, I do referre you to her Majestie's letter 
sent now ; and so do humbly take my leave of you. 

At Edynboroughe, the 15th of July, 1567. 
Yours to use and command. 

As yet these Lordes wyll not suffer Mr. N. Elveston, sent 
from my Lord of Murrey, to have access to the Quene, nor to 
send my Lord of Murrey's letter unto her. 



THROGMORTON TO THE EARL OF BEDFORD.* 

My Lorde, I think you see and fynde daylie newe oc- 
casions to give you cause to seke from above the remedye 
of the disorders committed upon the borders : and my advice 
to your Lordship shal be, that you follow and procure the 

* The Earl of Bedford was lieutenant of the borders. 



1567.] FLIGHT AND DEATH OF BOTH WELL. 257 

same with all speed you can. For T perceive and find here, 
that they be shrewdly bent that way ; and do mean to do 
unto you all the displeasure they can, so soon as they find 
that the Queue's Majestic, our mistress, shall not favour them 
in these their present actions. As unto the late offence done 
upon your border, I can assure your Lordship, it was not 
by any knowledge from these Lords, but only by Fernehest 
and his followers, at the solicitation of Both well* and his 
friends : for your friends here be sorry for it, and will not let 
to give you some warning before they break with you, 
if the same may be done by any convenyent means. In the 
mean time, my Lord, travail for some order from above : 
for, I promise you, it is high time. 

And touching myselffe, and my being here, I must con- 
fcsse to your Lordship, I never was in so busy and dan- 
gerous a legation in my lyffe ; not knowing almost which 
way to turn me. 

These Lords have not yet given me any audience ; excuse 

* When Mary was taken, Bothwell escaped, and at first tried to 
raise a party among the turbulent clans against the Lords, but finding 
his exertions fruitless, he fled to the Orkneys, and became a pirate. 
His end is thus told by Sir James Melvil. 

" Now the Lord of Grange, his two ships being in readiness, he 
made sail towards Orkney, and no man was so frank to accompany him 
as the lord of Tullibardin, and Adam Bothwell, bishop of Orkney. But 
the Earl (Bothwell) was fled from Orkney to Shetland, whither also 
they followed him, and came in sight of Bothwell's ship, which moved 
the lord of Grange to cause the skippers to hoes up all the sails, which 
they were loath to do, because they knew the shallow water there- 
about. But Grange, fearing to miss him, compelled the mariners, so that 
for too great haste the ship wherein Grange was, did break upon a bed 
of sand, without loss of a man, but Bothwell had leisure in the mean 
time to save himself in a little boat, leaving his ship behind him, which 
Grange took, and the'rein the lord of Tallow, John Hepburn of Ban- 
toun, Dalgleesh, and divers others of the Earl's servants. Himself fled 
to Denmark, where he was taken, and kept in strait prison, wherein he 
became mad and dyed miserably." 

VOL. I. S 



258 DANGER OF THE QUEEN OF SCOTS. [JULY, 

ing the same by the absence of th'Earles of Marre and Glen- 
came, the Lord Simple, and others of theyr bande, saying 
they dare not take upon them the hearing and the answering 
of so mightie matters, without the presence of the whole 
companye ; but I take it, rather to be used towards me for 
delaye then otherwyse, not being in any sort willing that 
I shall speake with theyr Quene. Notwithstanding I have 
earnestly pressed the same and have wonne one of the wysest 
amongst them to my desyre therin ; but no otherwise than 
that he dare not yet be acknowen to the rest of the same : 
such is theyr difficultie in this matter. What hereafter maye 
come from them I know not ; my perplexity is the more, when 
I remember these men's desyres here, and our humors at 
home : and therof breedeth my greatest doubte of any good 
to be done for us in this tyme. 

I have been wrytten unto by the other syde, as namely, by 
the Hambletons, the Earle of Argyle, by the Master of Max- 
well, and others ; and I do beare them all fayre in hande ; to 
th'ende I maye the better be able to discover theyr meanings 
and designes : although I must tell you truly, I lyke nothinge 
of theyr doings. 

The Quene is in great danger, by reason of the great rage 
and fury of the people against her.* Th'Earle Bothwell is 
thought to be in the north partyes with the Earle of Huntleye 

* Mary was at this time anything- but popular in Scotland. Sir. 
Nicholas Throgmorton, in a letter to Queen Elizabeth, dated July 18, 
1567, (preserved in the State Paper Office,) says : " And though these 
Lordes and Counsellours speake reverently, myldely, and charitably of 
theyre Quene, so as I cannot gather by theyre speeche any intention to 
cruelty or vyolence ; yet I do fynde by intellygence, that the Quene is 
in very great peryll of her lyfe, by reason that the people assembled 
at thys convention do mynde vehemently the destruction of her. 

" It is a publyke speeche amongest all the people, and amongst all 
the estates (saving the counsellors), that theyre Quene hath no more ly- 
berty nor pryviledgc to commyt murder, nor adulterye, than any 
other private person, neyther by God's lawe, nor by the laws of the 
realme." 



1567.] THE DESIGNS OF FRANCE. 259 

and others, to make the best party e he can. The assembly 
contynueth the 20th day of this month : where I think 
little will be done to the Queen of Scotlande's advantage. I 
do humbly pray your Lordship, dispatch this packet with 
great diligence to Mr. Secretory. Thus I do humbly take 
my leave of your good Lordship. At Edenborowghe, this 20 
Julye, 1567. 

These men have here in pay four hundred and fifty 
harquebusshyers, in convenient order. 



SIR HENRY NORRIS* TO QUEEN ELIZABETH. 

It may please your Majestic, the 17th of July, the Duke of 
Chastillerault came to this town, and the day following went 
to the court, accompanied with the Scottish ambassador, who 
I perceive is not so much a Hamilton in blood, as French 
in devotion ; and by them wholly employed, in all these 
matters of Scotland, to persuade and win such to them as 
may in any way stand them in stead. 

The Duke being there, the King declared unto him the 
misery which his country was presently in, by the cap- 
tivitie of the Queen and disobedience of her subjects; which, 
he said, was now high time to be looked into and remedied ; 
and, therefore, as one that meant not to forsake her in ex- 
tremity, he would neither spare cost nor any thing else to set 
her at liberty, and to restore her to her absolute authority ; 
so as he, the said Duke, and others which had power and 
credit at home, would also mind the matter, and joy no to- 
gether therm. The Duke made answer, that, like as he had 
always borne a faithful heart towards his prince and con 

* Sir Henry Norris, afterwards created Lord Norris of Rycot, in 
Oxfordshire, who married the daughter of Lord Williams of Thame, by 
whom he had six sons, all of them highly distinguished men. He died 
in 1601. He was now ambassador in France. 

s 2 



260 THE DESIGNS OF FRANCE. [JULY, 

trey, and for the service therof adventured his life, as it was 
well knowen, at Pinkey and other places ; so was he still ready 
to hazarde the same, with all the frends he could make, and 
to redress his soveraigne's cause. The Kinge thanked hym 
for it, and sayd the necessitie of the cause would require no 
delay ; and therefore his advise was, that he shoulde hasten 
himselfe home, where his presence might do muche good ; 
adding further, that, by the faythe of a prince, he woulde 
ayde them all to the uttermoste of his power. " And though," 
sayd he, " the Quene of Englande do make fayre semblaunse 
in this matter, yet do I not greatly truste her, for I have dis- 
covered of late that she dothe secretly practise with the 
Lordes to worke her owne commoditie, as the sending thither 
of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton, and certayne money, dothe well 
declare. But, " sayd he," it shall cost her dear as any thing 
that ever she tooke in hande." 

The Duke began to declare to the Kinge, how affectionate 
he and all his house had been, next the Quene his soveraigne, 
to the crown of Fraunce,of whom he had receaved many bene- 
fits, having the honour to be one of the eldest knights of the 
Kinge' s order, and by his predecessors made duke of Chastil- 
lerault, although he was nowe (he knew not for what cause) 
dispossessed therof: and therupp on woulde fayne have gone 
further touching his dukedome, but that the Frenche (desyring 
not to here on that syde) cut it shorte, and offered other talke. 
Wherin Monsr. de Martiguz, standing by, sette in a foote : 
saying to the Kinge, that if he woulde gyve him but three thou- 
sande harquebuziers, payd for three moneths, he durst take 
upon him to set the Quene at liberty e, in despite of her owne 
subjects, or any other that woulde take their parte, or els he 
woulde never returne agayne into Fraunce. The Kinge gave 
him thanks for his offer, but the Quene-mother sayde, it was 
more tyme for him to returne to his government, and do good 
justice, than to talke of suche matters, when they had irons 
enow in the fyre ; which the connestable also confirmed, say- 



1567.] THE DESIGNS OF FRANCE. 261 

ing " Ho ! ho ! is it now time to enter again into those 
matters ?" 

By this your Majestic may perceive, that notwithstanding 
their great brags, (which are given forth for the nones, to 
astonish your Majesty, and to keep you from dealing 
therein,) they would fain serve their turns with words and 
promises, if they might, being not well able to depart with 
more, although they vaunt the contrary, and say they will 
send thither out of hand two thousand harquebuziers. The 
Quene-mother, I know, loves not the Queen of Scotland : 
and, but that she fears to be prevented by your Majesty, 
cither in courtesy or otherwise, now in this time of her 
need, she would let her try it by the teethe, for any great 
devotion she has to procure her liberty. I would to God, 
therefore, it might please your Majesty to deal roundly 
therein, and to make your proffit so as the French may be 
disappointed of their purpose ; the honour and surety wher- 
of must needs be great, both to yourself and to the 
realm. 

The Duke of Chastillerault, having promised to run the 
French course, and to carry with him as many as he may,, 
had sent him from the King, the 22nd of July, a fair present 
of plate, esteemed three times the value of that was given 
the Earl of Murray ; which, as I have learned since, was 
worth but a thousand franks. It is reported, the said Duke 
shall take his journey homewards very shortly : but whether 
he doth pass through England or no, is yet doubted. 
Some say he shall, and that the King will write unto your 
Majesty for his safe passage; others say again he shall go 
by the lunge seas, and conduct some force with him. 

The King is gone to Villers Costretz, from whence some 
think he will return back again, and not go to Company. 
But I believe rather he will, and so farther towards Calais, if 
some sudden occasion alter not his purpose. 

The King of Spayne's army, led by the Duke of Alva, 
has already passed through the French Conte and Lorraine, 



26*2 THROGMORTON'S NEGOTIATIONS. [AUG. 

between Metz, Thou, and Verdun : so as it is thought by this 
they are come to Luxembourg. The Kinge of Spayne him- 
selfe will followe by the latter end of September, as it is cer- 
tainly reported, with the Prince his sonne : who shall be 
marryed, at his coming into Flanders, to the Emperor's 
eldest daughter. 

The Cardinall of Lorrayne and all the rest of his house 
are at Nantueil, fourteen leagues from this towne : being 
minded to be at the courte, when the Kinge cometh to Com- 
peigne : where is lyke to be a great assemblye. Thus, having 
no other matter at this tyme worthy your Majestie's advertise- 
ment, I ceasse to trouble you any farther : beseeching Al- 
mighty God to prosper you, in helthe, honour, and felicitie. 

From Paris, the 23rd of July, 1567. 



THROGMORTON TO CECIL. 

Sir, according to her Majestie's order in your letter of the 
last of Julye, I have expected newe order from thence ; and 
have abstayned from all negotiation with these Lords, save 
with suche as you shall perceave I treated with by her Ma- 
jestie's letter sent at this time. I do perceive by the Lorde of 
Ledington, they coulde be as well contented, that I were hence, 
as I desyre it ; and surely they see through into your doings, 
and do understande such thinges and speeches as I could 
have wyshed had never come to their knowledge. The sayde 
Lorde of Ledington sayde unto me the night before the 
dispatehe hereof, " It is to no purpose for you to tarye here : 
you may make matters worse then they be : for we may not 
satisfie the Quene your mistres' affections unless we shoulde 
caste our Kynge and contrey and our selfFes awaye : and she 
wyll do nothing that can be plausible to us. So as the least 
harme (nay," sayd he, " we will take it for a piece of good,) 
wyll be for her Majestic to lett us alone, and neyther to do us 
good nor harme : and peradventure thys will bring forthe 



1567.] THROGMORTON'S NEGOTIATIONS. 263 

belter success then any other course. For now we begin 
to hold all things suspected that comes from you ; and if 
you be over busy with us, you will dry ve us faster to France 
then we have desire to run." 

They have utterly refusyd me access to the Queen ; and I 
believe Lynerolls shall speed no better, if he have com- 
mission to press it. They show themselffs resolved, how- 
soever their actions be esteemed abroad ; and so much the 
more they be careless, because they know there is no party 
here to be made against them, and for that such as lay 
aloof do now seek to concur with them. He says there be 
some amongst them which can be contented to entertain 
practise with any foreign Prince, and get some money from 
them. But as for shedding of blood, or stroke striking 
amongst themselffs, they will never come to it by any prac- 
tise of any foreign prince. " And, my Lord Ambassador," 
said he, " we know all the good purposes which have 
passed betwixt you, the Hambletons, the Earls of Argyle 
and Huntleye, since your coming into this country." Now, 
sir, to tell you my own opinion, I see no great purpose of 
my tarrying here any longer : for whatsoever you intende to 
treat with these men hereafter, it were good there were some 
pause used, to suffer them to chawe upon their own brydells. 
Thus, having nothing else worthy longer troubling of you, I 
do humbly take my leave of you, and do pray you to cause 
my letter herewith enclosed to be sent to my wife. At 
Edinburgh, the 9th of August, 1567. 



THROGMORTON TO CECIL. 

Sir, what I have learned since the arrival of my Lord 
of Murray and Mons. de Lynneroll, you shall understand by 
my letter to her Majesty at this time. The French do in 
their negotiations as they do in their drink, put water to 



264 THE EARL OF MURRAY. [AUG. 

theyr wyne. As I am able to see into theyr doings, they 
take it not greatlye to the heart, how the Quene spede ; whe- 
ther she lyve or dye, whether she be at lyberty or in prison. 
The marke they shote at is to renewe theyr old league ; and 
can be as well contented to take of this lyttel Kinge, (howso- 
ever his tytle be,) and the same by the order of these Lords, 
as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yesterday ; and me thinketh 
he will not tarry longe. You maye gesse how the Frenche 
wyll seke to dysplease these Lords, when they changed the 
coming of La Chappelle des Oursins for this man, because 
they doubted, that de la Chappelle shoulde not be gratefullto 
them, being a Papiste. Sir, to speake more playnely to you 
then I wyll do otherwise, me thinketh th' Earl of Murrey 
wyll runne the course that these men do, and be partaker 
of theyr fortune. I heare no man speake more bitterly 
against the tragedye, and the players therein, than he ; so 
lyttle lyking he hathe to horryble sinnes. I here an inklynge 
that Ledyngton is to go into Fraunce, which I do as muche 
myslike as anything for our purpose. I can assure you the 
whole Protestants of Fraunce wyll lyve and dye in these men's 
quarrells. And where there is brute amongst you, that ayde 
shoulde be sent to the adverse party e, and that Martigues 
shoulde come hither with some force : Mons. Dandelot hath 
assured of his honor, that, Martigues coming against them, 
he will come with as good a force to succour them. And if 
it be sent under meaner conduct, Robert Stuart shall come 
with as many to fortify them. But the Connestable hathe 
assured these lords, that the Kinge meaneth no way to offende 
them. Sir, I praye you fynde my revocation convenient, and 
spede you to further it, for I am now here to no purpose, un- 
less it be to kyndle these Lords more against us. Thus I do 
humbly take my leave of you, From Edinburgh, the 12th of 
August, 1567. 



1567.] THE DUKE OF NORFOLK. 265 

THE DUKE OF NORFOLK TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX.* 

I write these few lines, good cozin, rather because I 
would, among other of your friends, you should hear from 
me, then that I can write any thing of courtly proceed 
ings. And yet by the last letters I received I did understand, 
that the resolution for answer to the Archduke should 
be to satisfy al his wel-willers. My state in health was 
such as I was not able to repair to the court myself, al- 
though I received letters for my reparation in the afternoon, 
when I had received your packet in the morning before, 
which made me more able to know what I had to do ; and 
therefore, insted of my own going, I did write to her Majesty 
at some length, what I thought of the matter, which letter hath 
been scanned according to every man's affection, and ther- 
fore I newly am now counted a Papist. But as long as I dis- 
charge my duty and conscience to God, my Prince, and my 
country, I am too well mortified to care for slanderous re- 
ports. Thus, good cozin, resting yours, leaving the report 
of the state of matters now at the court to other of your 
friends report, who can write more certainly then I, because 
I heard not this eight days, I bid you most heartily fare- 
well. From Norwich, this 18th December, 1567. 
Your assured loving kinsman, 

T. NORFOLK, 

* The Emperor Maximilian this year sent Count Stolberg to treat 
for a marriage between the Archduke Charles and the Queen of 
England. The Earl of Sussex had been sent to the imperial court to 
negotiate this marriage ; but after various proposals, the article of 
religion was found to be an insurmountable difficulty, and the nego- 
tiation was broken off. The Duke of Norfolk, writing in favour of the 
Archduke, was therefore accused by his opponents of being a Papist. 
The letters of Sussex, describing his reception at Vienna, are printed 
in Lodge. 



266 MARY IN LOCHLEVEN. [APRIL, 

SIR WILLIAM DRURY* TO CECIL. 

It may please your honor, since the depeche of Nicholas 
Darington, I have understoode of some more certaintie of 
suche matter as passed betwene the Quene and th'erle of Mur- 
rey^ at his being with her nowe lastely atLowghlewyn, where, 
at the first, she burthened him of the rigour that was used unto 
her at this last parliament, and he answered, that he and the 
rest of the nobilitie could do no lesse for their owne suretie in 
respect they had enterprised to putt her into captivitie. From 
that she entered into another purpose, being marriage, pray- 
ing she might have a husband, and named one to her lykinge, 
George Dowglas I brother to the Lord of Lowghlewyn. Unto 
the which th'erle*replied, that he was over meane a marriage 
for her Grace, and sayd furder that he with the rest of the 
nobilitie would take advice thereupon. 

This in substance was all that passed betwene the Quene 
and th'erle of Murrey at that tyme. But after, uppon 25th 
of the last, she enterprised an escape, and was the rather nerer 
effect throughe her accustomed long being a bedd all the 
morning. The manner of it was thus : There cometh into 
her the landresse early as other tymes before she was 
wonted, and the Quene, (according to such a secret prac- 

* Sir William Drury, eldest son of Sir Robert Drury, of Edgerly in 
Buckinghamshire. He married the widow of Lord Williams of Thame. 
He was made by Elizabeth Marshal of Berwick. " His youth/' says 
Lloyd in his Worthies, " was spent in the French wars, his middle- 
age in Scotland, and his old age in Ireland." He died Lord Deputy of 
this latter country. 

f Who had been appointed Regent. 

J Murray's half brother, and one of the chief personages of Scott's 
romance, " The Abbot." I have met with some document, mention- 
ing a son of Mary, by this same George Douglas, but cannot at pre- 
sent lay my hand upon it. It was by his aid that the Queen escaped 
from Lochleven castle. In a letter of the 7th of May, printed in Keith, 
Drury says, after the Queen's escape, " I hear that George Douglas, 
notwithstanding his great merit for her liberty, is now but little ac- 
counted of." 



1568.] MARY ATTEMPTS TO ESCAPE. 267 

lice), puts on the weed 1 of her laundress, and so, with the 
farthel 2 of clothes and her muffler upon her face, passes owt 
and enters the boat to pass the Loch, which, after some 
space, one of them that rowed said merrily, " let us see what 
manner of dame this is ! " and therewith offered to pull down 
her muffler, which to defend she put up her hands, which 
they espied to be very fair and white, wherewith they entered 
into suspicion whom she was, beginning to wonder at her 
enterprise. Whereat she was little dismayed, but chardged 
them upon danger of their lives to row her over to the 
shore, which they nothing regarded, but eftesones rowed her 
back again, promising her that it should be secreted, and 
in especial from the lord of the house under whose guard she 
lies. It seems she knew her refuge, and where to have 
found it, if she had ones landed, for there did and yet do 
linger George Douglas, at a little village called Kinrosse, 
hard at the Loch side, and with the same George Douglas 
one Simple and one Beacon, the which two were sometime 
her trusty servants, and as yet appears they mind her no 
less affection. 

The Lord of Fleming, notwithstanding he still victualeth 
and makes provision, he has offred three personages of as 
great livehoode as himself to enter caution and surety unto 
the Erie of Murray, that he shall only hold the peace at the 
devotion and service of the young King, and to none other, 
which of the wiser sort is judged but delay, and therefore not 
accepted. 

William Lesseley is still in the castle of Edenbourge, and 
hath been divers times examined by the Secretary, the Pre- 
sident, Mr. James Maguile, and Mr. Henry Banes ; but 
nothing of effect can be tried of him. The writings that he 
has, as they say, were of no great consequence, directed for 
the most part from the Bishop of Glasgow to Dumblayn 
andKillwemers to their friends, containing no notable purpose; 

i Clothes. 2 Bundle 



268 MURRAY REGENT. [APRIL, 

neverthelesse he shall not yet be set at libertie, till he be 
better tryed. 

Th'erle of Murrey hath uppon understanding of the two 
appointments past to be frustrated, sent Mr. Nicholas Jefeston 
into Twedele to Sesford and others, to spurre them to justice. 
And as semeth he taketh this remissenes in such good works 
in very displeasant sort, and thinks himselfe ill handled in 
particular. 

There have suffered since th'erle of Murray's sessions at 
Glasgow, sixe Lenox-men. And the other day one of the 
Hamiltons and Stewerds, of purpose awayting one of the Sim- 
ples, met with him uppon the way, and there killed him. 

Th'erle of Castells makes means to come to the Regent, so 
he might be earnestly sought unto, which the Erie of Murray 
will not grant unto. 

And thus I committ your Honor to the tuition of God. 

From Barwyk, the 2nd of April, 1568. 

Your Honor's humbly at commandement, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



SIR WILLIAM DKURY TO CECIL. 

Right honorable, it maye please you to be advertised that 
being earnestlye required by th'earle of Murrey his letter for 
the speedy and hasty convoye of these letters unto Mr. Elphi- 
ston is the chief occasion of this dispatche, having as yet 
but lyttle more to saye, more than in my former I signified, 
and referred unto the reporte of my servante, saving that I 
gather that ere manye dayes passe, th'erle of Murrey e hopeth 
to bring something to passe to his owne contentation. 

Their gathering continueth still on both sydes,* but th'earle 
of Murreye's companie is botke the greater and also en- 
creaseth most. He hathe presently put in paye twelve score 

* Mary had now escaped from Lochleven. 



1568.] MARY AT LIBERTY. 269 

harquebusiers, which came from Edenborough and other 
places. 

And as I can gather that as the Queen contents herself 
with her liberty, so if she enjoyed the same free from owt of 
the hands of the Hamilton, her liberty would be as joyful 
and delectable unto her ; but whether the same grow either 
for the old hate and mislyking to the hows, or for their 
plain speech with finding fault and putting her in mind 
of what they have adventured for her, and that they can leave 
her as they have drawn unto her, I know not. 

Th'earles of Huntley and Argyle lye still. The Queen 
offred to make the Earl of Argyle lieutenant of the field. 
Whether it were that she assured herself of him, or to procure 
his coming, I know not. And that the Master of Maxwell 
should have the second chardge. 

There is one John Drysdale, who being put most in trust 
by the Lord of Loughleven, was the chief carrier and con- 
veyer of letters between the Queen and George Douglas,* 
as appears, who riding with the Lord of Loughleven towards 
th'earle of Murray, finding himself as it seems guilty in 
his conscience, stale privily away from him four or five 
miles before he came to the place, and is fled. 

The Queen is content to pardon all saving five, so that 
they will come to her, viz. th'erle Morton, the Lord Lindsay, 
Lord Simple, James Bawford, and Craggemyller, now Provost 
of Edenboroughe. 

There is a river as it were of like distance between them, 
whereunto the stout watch on either side do daily meet 
and talk together. The cause of their stout going so far 
from their forces is by reason of a bridge there, which is the 
chief passage for quarter. 

There is daily practise and invention to allure the loose 
persons of Tyvidale and Liddisdale, Hallidan, and other places 
not only to go unto her, but also to annoy and offend these 
borders. 

* By whose aid the Queen escaped from prison. 



270 MARY WITH THE HAMILTON. [MAY, 

God kepe your Honor. From Barwyk, the 12th of Maye, 
1568. 

The Quene would willingly have gone for her more suerty 
to Dumbarton Castle ; but the Ambletons wyll not therunto 
condescend, alledging that there she should be in lyttell 
better estate then in Loghleven, consydering the practice 
that the Lord of Ledington would use to the Lord Fleming. 
But as that may be one cause, so they thynk by having her 
in theyr possession they shal be the stronger, and bryng 
theyr purpose the better to passe, and she is now gone to 
Draffen, lyttle to her contentation. Captain Collyne, who se- 
cretely levying of soldiers to go to the Quene, is apprehended, 
and in the Castell of Edenborogh. The Lord of Grange 
having well furnished the castell with victualls, is gone to 
Glaskoe, leaving the charge of the same to his brother, and 
to other of his frendes. 

The French embassador should as yesterdaye night have 
bene at Edenborough henceward. 

Your Honor's assuredly at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

Right honorable, according to my last of the 14th of this 
present, touching the encounter of the Queue's force and the 
Earle of Murraye's,* the same was true, and the Earle, 
the Viceroy, the Lord Seton, the Lord Ross, the younge Lord 
of Preston, Sir James Ambleton, the Lord of Treybrowen, 
and others prisoners, and divers slaine ; whereof the most are 
of the Ambletons, and two captaines of footemen, as Stewart 
and Loader, should also be slaine, and their ensignes taken. 
Their ordinance is also taken, as fower field pieces, which 
were the Ambletons', and the carriage with the powder 
by some accident as they were fighting took fire and 

* The celebrated battle of Langsyde, which compelled Mary to fly 
into England. 



1568.] BATTLE OF LANGSYDE. 271 

blew up. Th'Earle did his best to stay blood to be shed, 
yea by his contraries* the same is affirmed. The Queen 
a reasonable distance of, and gave the looking on, till she 
saw howe it preceded, and then retired unto Dumbarton, 
where she yet remains, and not so far followed nor in the 
chase so much harm done as might, for that most were of 
foot. The Lord Hume is hurt with a spear in his leg, 
whom th'earle could not have spared nor his. As I before 
have said, I have some here who are not yet returned, by 
whom I shall know the whole, yet in the meanwhile for 
confirmation of my former, I thought it fit to say thus much. 
Monsieur deLeamounte minds to return, if not already past, 
from the west parties, as I am advertised. 

There is tofore, as I did signify, past hither Beton ;f I can- 
not hear of any commission. As I can gather he came into 
the way about Morpette. ' Two pence a mile will further a 
stranger, whatsoever his arrand be, to horses ; the same I re- 
far unto your Honor's further discretion. 

There is of the March some Lords that deals with me to 
procure them licence to shroud themselves in England, that 
dowtes th'earle's victory e will turn to their evil, not that 
they were now in the field with the Queen in person, but in 
heart, and minded within four days to have had the rest 
there, which is known, as also their not coming to the Earl 

* His enemies. " There were/' says Sir James Melvil, " not many 
horsemen to pursue after them, (the Queen's army,) and the Regent 
cried to save and not to kill, and Grange was never cruel, so that there 
were but few slain and taken." Yet Mary in her letter to Elizabeth 
from "Workington, on her first arrival in England, dwells on Murray's 
cruelty to the fugitives. Melvil's description of this conflict is ex- 
tremely vivid, and forms more than the groundwork of that given by 
Scott in the admirable romance already quoted. 

t It is this Beacon who was said to have carried a ring from Mary 
to Elizabeth, asking an asylum and protection in England; but it would 
appear by this letter that he came before Mary could have had any in- 
tention of coming into England. 

i Morpeth. 



272 MARY IN ENGLAND. [MAY, 

according to the proclamation ; to whom I give but a deaf 
eare, till I knowe the Quene's Majestie's pleasure. 

Mr. Elphiston passed by this morninge, demanding of me 
if I had not receaved a letter from the Quene's Majestic, my 
soveraigne, touching border matters. I have receaved none 
such. And so for this present, I committ your Honor to the 
tuition of God, who ever preserve you ! From Barwick, this 
15th of May, 1568. 

Your Honor's humbly assured at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS* TO CECIL. 

The Quene of Scotts is staied still at Carlill by the Deputie 
Warden's good behaviour and discretion toward her Highnes' 
service ; and my Lord of Northumberlande,f upon the receipt 
of your letter a Sondaye nighte, came away from Carlill a 
Monday, whereby I am quieted, and meane for preservation 
of my healthe to make my jornies easier, so that it wil be 
to-morrow before I come to Carlill. And because the Quene 

* The Knollyses, who were allied by blood to the Queen, were in 
their county the rivals of the Norrises. Sir Francis was the son of 
Robert Knollys, a gentleman to the privy chamber to Henry VIII. He 
lived in exile during Mary's reign, and became a zealous puritan. 
Elizabeth honoured him as an honest man, and made him knight of 
the garter, and afterwards vice-chamberlain, captain of her guard, 
lieutenant of the county of Oxford, and finally treasurer of the house- 
hold. He was now sent to Carlisle to receive the Queen of Scots. He 
died in 1596. 

f Mary came into England, with a very slight retinue, on the 16th of 
May. As she landed within the jurisdiction of the Duke of Northum- 
berland, who was secretly in her favour, he claimed her as his prize, 
Von Raumer, in his " Contributions to Modern History," seems to 
have taken an entirely erroneous view of Northumberland's visit. He 
says, " On the 20th of May, she (Mary) was conveyed to Carlisle, in 
company with Lords Fleming, Livingston and Maxwell, and several 
English lords and ladies went thither by direction of Elizabeth, togethe 






15C8.J MARY AT CARLISLE. 273 

of Scotts is not removed from Carlill, therefore my letter to 
my Lord of Northumberlande, wherof I sent you the eopie, 
is not delivered unto hym, (according to my direction in that 
behalfe prescribed to the bearer.) Also my Lord of Northum- 
berlande yesterday, hearing of my coming, came from his howse 
at Toplife,* and mett me on the way at this end Borough 
Briggs,f and with him Sir Nicholas Fearfax and Sir William 
Fearfax his sone, Mr. Hungate, and Mr. Vavasor,J being- 
all unsounde in religion, and with his Lordship at Carlill. 

At the firste his Lordship complayned unto me of the De- 
putie Warden's misusage of him, saying that he would not 
suffer his Lordship to repaire into the castell to see the 
Quene, with any more companie then his page, not onlie to his 
dishonour, but as though he had bene a stranger and a suspect 
person. Wherunto I answered his Lordship verie playnlie 
that if he soughte to take the Quene into his own custodie 
oute of the Deputie Warden's hands, and that withoute war- 
rante, as his personall repaire to the Quene of Scotts also was 
without warrant at the Quene our mistres' hands, then did 
the Deputie Warden dutifullie and wiselie, and his Lordship 
had overshott himselfe verie much to the discontentation of 
her Highnes. Wherunto he answerde for th'excuse of his re- 
pair, that he thought himselfe bound in dutie for the honor 

with the Earl of Northumberland, who was to take upon himself the 
superintendence. This was the more necessary as the number of 
Mary's followers daily increased." 

Topcliffe, in Yorkshire, where was a castle of the Percies. 

t Boroughbridge in Yorkshire. 

J Sir Nicholas Fairfax of Walton and of Gilling, sheriff of Yorkshire 
in the twenty-third and twenty-eighth of Henry VIII. and the third 
of Elizabeth. He was a kinsman of the Earl of Northumberland, his 
grandmother having been a Percy. William Hungate of Saxton in 
Yorkshire. John Vavasor, of Haselwood in the same county. A 
younger son of Sir Nicholas Fairfax, .named Nicholas, married Jane, 
daughter of William Hungate, of Saxton, and one of his daughters 
was married to John Vavasor. Sir William was sheriff of Yorkshire 
in the twentieth of Elizabeth. 

VOL. I. T 



274 EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND. [MAY, 

of the Quene's Highnes, our mistres, to repaire into Com- 
merlande, where his lande lay, for the defence of the Quene 
of Scotts against the pursuite of her enemies. And for his 
desire to have the custodie of the Quene, he saythe he did 
desire it not onlie because the Deputie Warden was too base a 
man to have such a charge, but also because the Councell of 
Yorke had given him letters of authoritie to the Sheriff and 
Justices of Commerlande to assiste him in that behalfe. But 
I told his Lordship that " although the Councell of Yorke had 
forgotten themselves verie muche, to appointe th'assistance of 
the shiere to any other then to the Deputie Warden, or to 
allowe of the repaire of your Lordship to the Quene of Scotts, 
before her Highnes' speciall pleasure knowne in that be- 
halfe, yet neverthelesse Mr. Gargrave * utterlie denied the 
giving of authoritie to your Lordship to interrupte the War- 
den in any parte of his chardge, and he saithe further, your 
Lordship made your repaire firste, and had theire allowance 
and letter of assistance sent after you, because they under- 
stode by your letters that the Quene of Scotts was arived at 
a howse of yours, being an inconvenient place for her safetie, 
if her enemies shoulde pursue her." 

His Lordship also founde himself somewhat greved with the 
token sent unto him by her Highnes of a speeche that she had 
with him upon the privie stairs at Westminster. In th'end 
his Lordship axed myne advice, and I desyred him to con- 
sider with himselfe whether it were not beste for him to 
make his repaire to the Quene's Highnes forthwith; the 
which he misliked very muche, in respecte of the charge 
thereof to ensue. I was so wearie yesternight, that I forbare 
to write untill this morninge. I must nedes tell you that I 
found Mr. Gargrave verie penitent and sorie for his sodayn 

* Sir Thomas Gargrave, son of Thomas Gargrave, of Wakefield in 
Yorkshire. He was speaker oLthe House of Commons in Elizabeth's 
first parliament, and was at the time of this letter President of the 
Council of the North. After the dissolution he had been much en- 
riched by various grants of abbey lands. He died in 1579. 



1568.] EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 275 

private allowance of my Lord of Northumberland's dealing 
with the Queen of Scots in any part. 

My Lords of the Cownsayle's letter of thanks unto my 
Lord Wharton,* for his wise and dutiful a dvice unto my 
Lord of Northumberland, wold comfort him well, and make 
him a careful ware man in her Highness service. 

Sir George By west also sent a man hither yesternight 
(being sick himself,) to declare unto my Lord Skrope, that 
he, meeting with my Lord of Northumberland at his first 
entrance of his journey towards the Queen of Skottes, did ad- 
vyse his Lordship earnestly to forbear his repair to the Queen 
of Skottes, until her Highness pleasure were known. I told 
Sir Nicholas Fayrfaxe yesterday, that he wold be tawghte to 
attend upon her Highness pleasure before he should attend 
upon the Queen of Skottes, or upon my Lord of Northumber- 
land, in such cases. Thus with my most hearty commend 
tions, I commit you to God. From Richmond,* this Thurs 
day, the 27 of May, 1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

* Sir Thomas Wharton, first Baron Wharton of Wharton, in West- 
moreland, Warden of all the Marches towards Scotland, and Governor 
of Berwick. He died this year (1568.) 

t Sir George Bows was a man of great property and weight in the 
north. We shall shortly meet with him as provost marshal of the 
army, acting a conspicuous part in the suppression of the northern 
rebellion of 1569. 

+ Richmond, in Yorkshire. 



276 MARY AT CARLISLE. [MAY, 



LORD SCROPE * AND SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO THE 
QUEEN. 

We arryved here at Karlell yesterday at sixe of the clock 
after noone, and by the waye my Lord Harrys f met us sixe 
myles from this towne, and after he had discoursed of the 
lamentable estate of the Quene of Skottes his mystres, inveigh- 
ing much agaynst the treasonable crueltie of her enemyes, 
and also saying as muche as he coulde for the innocency of 
his mistres touchyng the murder of her husbande, the which he 
sayd wold be easily proved, if the Quene his mystres might be 
herd to speke for herselfe in your Highnes' presence, andaffirm- 
yng that he trusted your Highnes wolde ey ther gyve her ayde to 
the chastysing of her subjectes for her relieffe and comfortc, 
or els that your Highnes wolde gyve her leave to pass through 
your countrye into France to seeke relief otherwhere. Wher- 

* Henry le Scrope, ninth Baron Scrope of Bolton, in Yorkshire, 
Governor of Carlisle, and Warden of the West Marches. When Mary 
came into England, Lord Scrope was in London. 

t The following character of Lord Herries is given in a letter of Sir 
Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil, from Edinburgh, dated 20th August, 
1567, (in the State Paper Office :) 

" The Lord Herryes is the cunnyng horseleache, and the wysest of 
the whole faction ; but, as the Quene of Scotlande sayeth of hym, there 
is no body can be JUre of hym. He taketh pleasure to beare all the 
world in hande. We have good occasion to be well ware of hym. Sir, 
you remember how he handled us, when he delivered Dunfryse, Car- 
laveroke, and the Hermitage into our hande s : he made us beleave all 
shoulde be oures to the Fyrthe : and when we trusted hym best, how 
he helped to chase us away, I am sure you have not forgotten. 
Heere amongest his owne countrymen he is noted to be the most 
cautious man of hys nation. 

" It may lyke yow to remember, that he suffred hys owne hos- 
tages, the hostages of the Lord of Loughanver and Garlics, hys nexte 
neighboures and frendes, to be hanged for promis broken by hym. 
This muche I speake of hym, because he is the lykelyest and most 
daungerous man to inchaunte you." 



1568.] FIRST INTERVIEW WITH MARY. 277 

unto we answered, that your Highness could in no wise like 
her seking aid in France, thereby to bring Frenchemen 
into Skotland, and we dowted your Highness could thynk 
it mete to receive her so honourably into your presence 
as your desirous affection and good will towards her did 
wish, until your Highness might be well instructed and 
satisfied, by probable reasons, that she was clear and inno 
cent of the said murder, by some such wise man as he that 
might set forth the same manifestly.* Whereupon, and 
through other conferences, private with me, the Lord Skrope, 
he seemed to determine to ride towards your Highness for 
that intent, within a day or twain, which was the thing we 
specially sought for. And after this, repairing into the castle, 
we fownd the Queen of Skottes in her chamber of presence 
ready to receive us ; where, after salutations made, and our 
declaration also of your Highness sorrowmlnes for her la- 
mentable misadventures and inconvenient arrival, although 
your Highness was gladdand joyful of her good escape from 
the peril of her person, with many circumstances thereunto 
belonging, and we found her in her answers to have an elo- 
quent tongue, and a discrete head, and it seems by her do- 
in ges she hath stout courage and liberal heart adjoined ther- 
unto. And after our delyvery of your Highness letters, she 
fell into some passion with the water in her eyes, and ther- 
with she drew us with her into her bedd-chamber, where she 
complained unto us, for that your Highness did not answer 
her expectation for the admitting her into your presence forth- 
with, that upon declaration of her innocence, your Highness 



* In an interview with Queen Mary on the 30th of May, the letter 
describing which is printed in Ellis, vol. ii. p. 243, Sir Francis Knollys 
intimated to her, that certain crimes might justify the deposition* of a 
sovereign. " The question is," said he, " whether your Grace de- 
served to be put from the government, or not, for if your Grace should 
be guilty of any such odious crime as deserves deposall, then howe 
should they be blamed that have deposed you ?" 



278 FIRST INTERVIEW WITH MARY. [MAY, 

wold eyther withowt delay give her ayde yourselfe to the sub- 
duing of her tniemyes, or els being now come of good will 
and not of necessitie into your Highnes' handes, (for a good and 
greatest part of her subjectes, sayd she, do remayne fast unto 
her styll,) your Highnes wold at the leaste forthwith gyve 
her passage through your countrye into France, to seeke ayde 
at other Prynces' handes, not dowting but both the French 
King and the King of Spayne wold gyve her relief in that 
behalf to her satisfaction. And here she fell into discourse 
that the cause of the warr and disobedient treason of the 
chiefs of those her subjects, was therby to kepe that which 
she had too liberally given them, by vyolence, since through 
her privye revocation theroff within full age, they could not 
enjoye the same by laws, and with thys she affyrmed that 
bothe Lyddyngton and the Lord Morton were assentyng to 
the murder of her husband, as it could wel be proved, al- 
tho nowe they wold seem to persecute the same. Unto the 
first part wherof we answered, that your Highnes was in- 
wardly sorry and very muche greeved that you could not do 
her that great honor to admytt her solempnly and worthely 
into your presence, by reason of this great slander of murder, 
wherof she was not yet purged. But we sayd that we wer sure 
thatyour Highnes' affection to wards her was great ; that whether 
her Grace could purge hyrself or not in that behalfe, yet if 
she wold depend uppon your Highnes' favor, without sekyng 
to bryng in strangers into Skotland, (the imminent danger 
wherof your Highnes' could not suffer,) then undowtedly 
your Highnes would use all the convenyent meanes you could 
for her relief and comforte. And withall we sayd that if it 
wold please her Grace to direct us thereunto, we wold adver- 
tise your Highnes of those her determy nations with all spede, 
uppon answer wherof we should be able to declare furder of 
your Highnes' intent and meaning. Wherwith her Grace 
complayned muche of delayes to her prejudice, and wyn- 
ning of tyme to her enemyes, so that discontentedly she 
contently herselffe therewith. Wheruppon we took our 



1568.] DIFFICULTY OF KEEPING HER IN ENGLAND. 279 

leave, saying we wold dispatch away with all possible 
speed. Also the Queen of Skottes doth presently send 
up the Lord Herrys with her letters for speed reason 
lution. 

And now it behooves your Highness, in mine opinion, grave- 
lie to consider what answer is to be made herein, specially 
because that many gentlemen of diverse shires here near 
adjoining within your realm, have heard her daily defence 
and excuses of her innocence, with her great accusations of 
her enemies very eloquently told, before our coming hither ; 
and therefore I, the vice-chamberlain,* do referr to your 
Highness better consideration, whether it were not honourable 
for you in the sight of your subjects and of all foreign 
princes, to put her Grace to the choice whether she woll de- 
part back into her country without your Highness impeach 
meant, or whether she woll remain at your Highness devotion 
within your realm here, with her necessary servants only to 
attend upon her, to see howe honourably your Highness can do 
for her. For by this means your Highness, I thynk, shall 
stop the mouths of backby ters, that otherwy se wold blow 
out seditious rumours, as well in your own realm as else 
where, of detaining of her ungratefully. And yet I thynk it 
is likely that if she had her own choice, she wold not go 
back into her own realm presently, nor until she might 
look for succour of men out of France to join with her 
there. Or if she wold go presently into her own country, the 
worse were that perad venture with danger enough she might 
get into France, and that wold hardly be done, if my Lord of 
Murray have a former inkling of her departure thither. And 
on the other side, she cannot be kept sorygorously as a pry 
sooner with your Highness honour, in mine opinion, but with 
devyces of towels or toys at her chamber window, or else 
where, in the night, a body of her agility and spirit may 
eskape soon, being so near the border. And surely to have 

* Sir Francis Knollys. 



280 DESCRIPTION OF MARY. [JUNE, 

her carryed furder into the realme, is the hygh way to a dan- 
gerous sedition, as I suppose. 

Thus ceasing to trouble your Majestic, we wyshe the same 
prosperous felicyty, with long continuance of healthe, to the 
pleasure of God, and good contentation of your good sub- 
jects. 

Your Majestic' s most humble and obedient servants, 

H. SCROPE. F. KNOLLYS. 



SIR F. KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

Sir, as touching my letter wrytten to my Lordes of the 
Cownsayle, and namely that article touching my Lord 
Scrope's detaining of this Quene with the ayde of this band of 
Barwyke, without myn assistance, my Lorde Scrope is privie 
thereunto as to all other thyngs, and I am sure he woll not 
refuse the service therof, if it be offered unto hym : and myn 
assistance in her detention beyng but superfluous after the 
wekely charge is settdowne and made certain, I wold be very 
gladd to be rydd, by your good meanes, of this my super- 
fluous charge. I thought good to saye thus much, if per- 
haps the resolution fall owte, that she should be detained 
hereabouts. 

The strengthe of this Quene in Skotland, (saving what 
Frenchmen and French crownes may do ther,) doth depend 
not uppon herself, but uppon the Duke of Shatylleroe, for his 
tytle, uppon whom the Lord Herryse and many others do 
depend. 

And yet this ladie and pryncess is a notable woman. 
She semeth to regard no ceremonious honor besyde the ac- 
knowledging of her estate regalle. She shevveth a disposi- 
tion to speake much, to be bold, to be pleasant, arid to be 
very famylyar. She sheweth a great desyre to be avenged of 
her enemyes ; she sheweth a readines to expose herselfe to all 
perylls in hope of victorie; she delyteth much to hear of 



1568.] CHARACTER OF MARY. 281 

hardiness and valiancy, commending by name all approved 
hardy men of her country, although they be her enemy es ; and 
she commends no cowardnes even in her friends. The 
thing that most she thirsts after is victory, and it seems 
to be indifferent to her to have her enemies diminish, either 
by the sword of her friends, or by the liberal promises and 
rewards of her purse, or by division and quarrels raised 
amongst themselffes ; so that for victorie's sake, payne and 
perils seems pleasant unto her, and in respect of vic- 
tory, welthe and all things seems to her contemptuous 
and vile. Now what is to be done with such a lady and 
and pryncess, or whether such a pryncess and lady be to be 
nourished in one's by some, or whether it be good to halt 
and dissemble with such a lady, I referr to your judgment. 

If her Highness think it good to staye the coming in of 
the French into Skotiand, if her Highness thynk any peril 
towards her, if her Highness thynk any princes and poten- 
tates, or that any factious subjects may conspire against her, 
then I am sure she woll thynk it good policy roundly and 
plainly to assist her own cause, withowt colours and cloaks 
that hydeth no men's eyes but those that are blind, and 
surely the plainest way is the most honourable in my simple 
opinion. 

I take it an honourable quarrel for her Highness to expel 
the French, and the safest way thereto is to aid and count 
nonce the Regent in time. And if the spots in this Quene's 
coat be manifest, the plainer and the sooner that her High 
nes doth reveal her discontentation therewith, the more 
honourable it wol be, I suppose ; and it is the readiest way to 
stop the mouths of factious murmering subjects. But 
this is more than needs to be spoken to you. Wherefore with 
most hearty commendations, my Lord Scrope and I do com- 
mitt you to God. 

From Carlisle, the llth of June, 1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 



282 DESIGNS OF MARY. [JUNE, 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

This daye, at nine of the clocke, my Lorde Scrope and 
I presented Mr. Mydlemore to this Quene, and as touching 
the discourse betweene them, I leave to Mr. Mydlemore's de- 
claration, least I should disgrace his well labored speache, 
wherin he did very well observe his instructions. But to be 
playne with you, there is no fayre semblance of speeche that 
semeth to Wynne anye credyt with her, and altho she is con- 
tent to take and allow of this message to my Lorde of Mur- 
raye for abstinence from hostilities, because it makes for her 
purpose to staye her partie from falling presently from her, 
yet she seeth that this colde dealyng woll not satisfye her fyery 
stomache, and surely it is a great vanitie (in myn opynion) 
to thynk that she wol be stayde by curtesy, or brydled by 
straw, from bryngyng in of the French e into Skotland, or 
from employing all her force of monye, men of warr, and of 
frendshipp, to satisfye her bluddye appetite to shedd the 
bludde of her enemyes. As for imprysonment, she makes 
none account therof ; and unless she be removed as a pry- 
soner, it semeth she woll not be removed furder into the 
realme, to be detayned from her Hyghnes' presence. She 
playnly affirmeth that, howesoever she be detayned, the Duke 
of Shattilleroe, beyng heyre apparent, shall prosecute her 
quarrell with the power of the Frenche, and all the ayd of her 
dowrye and masse of monye by any meanes to be levied and 
made for her. 

Nowe, she being thus desperately sett, it is to be considered 
whether her Hyghnes defraying her here within her realme, 
shall not therby able her to imploy 1 2,000 1. yerely, being 
her dowrye in France, both agaynst Skotland and conse- 
quently agaynst England, wheras if she were at libertye, all 
her dowrye wold be spent uppon her owne findyng, and the 
charges thather Hyghnes shall be at in defraying of her here 
wold be well employed in Skotland, to the defending and ex- 



1568.] DIVERSIONS OF MARY'S RETINUE. 283 

pulsing of the French from thence. But I speak like a blind 
buzzard, and therefore woll leave these matters to you that 
have judgment. 

And thus, with my Lord Scroope's most hearty commen- 
dations and mine, I take my leave of you, desiring yet to 
be remembered to my wife. 

From Carlisle, the ]3th of June, at night, 1568. 
Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

Postscript. This last week's charges, ended on Friday, 
came unto 561. 

Postscript. She also uttered certain speeches in showing 
her loathsomeness to be removed further into England unless to 
her Highness presence, that it might be easily conjectured that 
some practises of escaping were not owt of her head, nor 
yet out of her hope. And her liberty of access unto her 
intelligences always doth encourage her own boldness 
herein. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

(June 15, 1568. Extract.) 
* # # # # # 

Yesterday her Grace went out at a postern to walk on 
a playing greene towards Skotland ; and we, with twenty -four 
halberders of Master Read's band, with diverse gentlemen 
and other servants, waited upon her, where about twenty of 
her retinue played at foote-balle before her the space of two 
hours, very strongly, nimbly, and skilfully, without any 
foul play offered, the smallness of their balle occasioning 
their fair play. 

And before yesterday, since our coming, she went but 
twice out of the town, once to the like play at foote-balle 



284 MARY AT CARLISLE. [JUNE, 

in the same place, and once she rode owte ahuntyng the hare, 
she gallopyng so faste upon every occasion, and her whole 
retinue being so well horsed, that we, uppon experience thereof, 
dowting, that uppon a sett course some of her frendes out of 
Skotland might invade and assault us upon the sodayne for 
to reskue and take her from us, we meane hereafter, if any 
such ryding pastymes be required that waye, so much to 
feare the indarigering of her person by some sodayn inva- 
sion of her enemies, that she must hold us excused in that 
behalfe. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

We have sent you here inclosed the copye of the procla- 
mation that was proclaimed this day at noone in this towne. 
The ground and cause of the same, my Lord Scroop hathe 
wrytten at large. Whereof this Quene hearing, was very 
much offended, and desyring to speak with us, at our fyrst 
coming, she complayned much that by this proclamation my 
Lord Warden seemed to allow my Lorde of Murraye to be 
Regent of Skotland, contrary to the Queue's highnes' letters 
and message sent unto her by Mr. Mydlemore. Whereunto 
we answered that her grace did much mystake the proclama- 
tion, for therein he was not called Regent, by which name 
he claymed his authority, but he is therin only named go- 
vernor of Skotland, by which name he claymed no authoritie, 
and therefore this proclamation doth not allow any tytle or 
clayme of his authoritie. But whether his tytle be good or 
evill, we sayd, that her Grace did well perceive that he is in 
possession of the government, and that he doth governe. 
And because that he offereth to answer justice according to 
the lawe of the marchesse, the which being neglected at this 
present myght be 2000/. hynderance to her Hyghnes' subjects, 



1568.] MVRY AT CARLISLE. 285 

besides the murders and robberies that thereupon might 
ensue, and also because no justice nor order would be an- 
answered nor kept, nor any damage nor danger to her Hy ghnes' 
subjects could well be avoided, until according to the laws 
of the marchess, Englishmen should be forbidden to receive 
into this realm the person or good of any Skotts fugityfes 
now upon the coming of him that doth govern in Scot 
land to this border. Therefore to the end that justice and 
order might be observed, and yet the allowance of the title 
and claim of the Regent might be avoided, we devised to 
call him governor, because he doth govern, and to fly the 
name of Regent, whereby he claims his authority. 

Herunto she answered that by this means we should neither 
please her Grace, nor my Lord of Murray, for neither wold 
he be content to lose the name of Regent, neither was she 
content he should be called governor. We answered that 
in this case we preferred justice and good order before the 
pleasing of any party. " Well," says she, " I see by this 
dealing that his party is countenanced and mine is dis- 
graced." " Madam," said we, " he hath non other count 
nonce, in this behalf, than the necessity of justice doth 
require ;" and so we parted. But indeed, if we had not 
advised ourselffes better, the name of Regent had ben in 
this proclamation, but I was troubled this last night withal 
in my bed, and in the morning we altered it to the name of 
governor, and some other things withal. I am marvay- 
lous sorry to hear of my Lord Herryse' return hither, whose 
wily head went beyond you, when he gat Mr. Mydlemore to 
come hither so soon : for it wold cost the Regent twenty 
dayes' work to finish his busynesse to his advantage ; the 
which being interrupted by Mr. Mydlemore, I know not 
what evil may come thereon. And this Lord Herryse seethe 
the bottom both of your doings and ours, and he woll stir 
coalls at his coining hither accordingly, neither woll there 
be any end of his perilous practyses ; but I am not guilty 



286 CHARACTER OF MARY. [JUNE, 

of his retorne hither. And thus, with my most hartie com- 
mendations, I take my leave of you. 

From Carlysle, the 16th of June, almost at myd-nyght, 
1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

(Extract,) 
* * * * # 

" Well," sayd she, (Queen Mary,) " I woll not detayne this 
Frenche ambassador untyll Master Mydelmore's comyng, 
neither woll I be any longer delayed ; for I woll require the 
Quene my good sister, that either she will lett me go into 
France, or that she woll put me into Dunbritone, unlesse she 
woll hold me as a prysoner. For I am sure," sayth she, u that 
her Highness woll not of her honor put me into my Lorde 
of Murraye's hands." Hereby we might gather that, altho 
she wold be put into Dunbritone, that she dare not well go 
thither of herselffe, if she were at lyberty. And sayth she, 
"I woll seke ayde forthwith at other Pry nces'handes that woll 
helpe me, namely, the Frenche King and the King of Spayne, 
whatsoever come of me ; because I have promysed* my people 
to give them ayde by August." And she sayd that she had 
found that true, which she had heard often of before her coming 
hither, which was that she sholde have fayre wordes enowe 
but no deedes. And surely all deedes are no deedes with her, 
unlesse her vyolent appetyte be satisfyed. And sayth she, 
" I have made great warrs in Skotland, and I praye God I 
I make no troubles in other realmes also :" and parting from 
us, she sayd, that if we dyd detayne her as a prysoner, we 
should have much ado wyth her. I omytt our replyes for 
brevitie sake. And touchyng her prayer, Ijoyned hartely with 
her that God of his mercy wold defende this realme from 
suche troubles, as thro our tendernes by her attempts myght 



1568.] MARY AT CARLISLE. '287 

arise, and her Highness from such perils as thereof might 
ensue. But alas, howe can we be safe from troubles, as long 
as our tender haltying on both legs before God and the 
world, doth hinder our friends that should be our strength, 
and strengthen our enemies that wol be our perils, and 
doth weaken and unlmytt some lymbe or members of the 
body of our realm from us, and may provoke God's anger 
against us, that many ways hath ben so merciful to us. 
But I find mine own fault, I shall be too loose, if I take 
not up betimes. Wherefore, with my Lord Scroop's most 
hearty commendations and mine, I commit you to God. 

From Carlisle, the 21st of June, 1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

Postscript. I cannot tell whether you have increased the 
posts with increase of their wages for this busy and neces- 
sarie time. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

I received your letter of the second of Julye, together with 
her Highness letter directed to this Queen, this morning at 
four of the clock, whereby you may perceive that the posts 
make but slow speed, howsoever it chances. I could not de- 
liver her Highness letter to this Queen until it was almost 
eleven of the clock ; and although she seemed at the first 
that this her Highness letter did not press her to remove, 
otherwise than th'others before had done, whereupon I 
thought we should have fallen into a new contention, yet in 
a while she seemed not greatly to repugn or deny to remove 
hence upon Monday or Tuesday next, before which time 
she looks to have answer of her last letter written to her 
Highness, but how this mood woll hold we know not. 

My Lord Scroope, and divers of our company here, 
do thynk that our earnest contention in my last letters partly 
specified, and our determination of refraining of all intelli- 



MARY AT CARLISLE. [JULY, 

gencies from her unless she wold remove, and our free offers 
in that behalffe unto her if she wold remove, hath made her 
more plyant herin than otherwyse she wold have bene; so 
that we trust we shall remove her hence upon Tuesdaye next 
towards Bolton Castle, according to her Hyghnes' pleasure. 
We marvell that we heare not of Mr. Skipworthe's comyng 
with the horses, nor yet of the lytter. 

Yesterday, this Quene, among other wordes, fell into this 
speche, that altho she were holden here as a prisoner, yet she 
had frendes that wold prosecute her cause, and, sayth she, " I 
can sell my ryght, and there be that woll bye it, and perad- 
venture it hathe bene in hand already." Wherbye she made 
me to thynk of your information touchyng the Cardinalle of 
Lorayne's practyse betweene her and the Duke of Anjoye. 
But whether she spake this bond jide, or to sett a good 
countenance of the matter as tho she could do great thyngs, 
I cannot tell. 

She doth also give oute to the followers of her parte, 
great assurances in wordes of ayde oute of France before the 
mydst of this next August. I marvayle that you heard not from 
me of our moving of this Quene to remove hence before the 
date of this your last letter, for my letter of the 26th, and 
agayne of the 27th of the last month sygnifyed therof, as well 
my letter of the 28th ; but the postes are growne very slacke, 
howsoever it happens. 

My Lorde of Murraye hath sent, by our messenger, to 
this Quene three coffers of apparyll, but because her Grace 
sayth that never a gowne is sent her hereby, but one of taffy ta, 
and that the rest is but cloaks and coveryngs for saddylls, 
and sleaves, and partlettes, and qweyffes, and such lyl^ tryn- 
ketts, therfore we have sent to my Lorde of Murraye 4gayne 
for her desyred apparyll, remayning in Loghlevin; but she 
doth offer our messengers nothyng at all for their paynes and 
charges. Wherfore her Hyghhes is lyke to beare the charge 
therof also. 

And thus, with my Lorde Scroope's most harty commen- 



1568.] MARY AT BOLTON CASTLE. 

dations and mine, I shall commit you to God. From Car- 
lyllc, the 7th of Julye, at 5 of the clock after noon, 156H. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

We received your letter of the 12th hereof, on Wednesday 
night very late, at Wharton, and we arrived here at Bolton 
Castle with this Queen jester night, one hour after sun 
setting. And since our departure from Carlisle with her, she 
hath ben very quiet, very tractable, and voy de of displesant 
countenance, although she says she woll not remove any 
further into the realm without constraynt. The which re- 
moving woll easilier be done, if it be taken in hand by better 
personages than we are. There hath ben no repair unto 
her by the way, as might have ben looked for ; the which 
repair was abridged by our sharp dealing with one Kris- 
tofer Lassells,* coming to Carlisle out of Yorkshire about 
three weeks past, of purpose to see this Queen, and because 
we understood him to be a lewd practiser and arrogant papist, 
and also to have ben before time in displeasure for practising 
with this Queen, therefore, after that he had confessed 
that he came of purpose to see the Queen, dwelling in York 
shire, and that he had ben in trouble for her cause ; we first 
declared unto him that no subject of the Queue's Highness 
ought to honour another pry no with his presence in form of 
visitation or welcoming the same, without commission or 
conduction of some of his superiors, and then we chose this 
ill man to disgrace for an example, in this sort : We ap- 

* There were several branches of the Lascelles settled in Yorkshire 
This was probably Christopher Lascelles, of Brackenburgh. Among 
the examinations concerning the conspiracy of the Duke of Norfolk, 
we find this " Christopher Lassells" as a person in whom the Queen 
should "beware how she trusted." 

VOL. I. I 



290 MARY AT BOLTON CASTLE. [JULY, 

poynted Mr. Morton to return with hym to his lodgyng, and 
to accompany hym untyll he had made hym ready to ryde 
with spede, and had seen hym out of the towne gates home- 
wardes agayne, without seeing of this Quene as his intent 
was. 

This house* appereth to be very strong, very fayer, and verie 
stately, after the oulde manner of byldyng, and is the hyghest 
walled house that I have seen, and hath but one entrance 
there into. And half the number of these soldiers may 
better watche and warde the same, than the whole number 
therof could do Carlyll Castle, where Mr. Reade and his 
soldiers and Mr. Morton and Mr. Wilford toke great paynes, 
and my Lorde Scrope also was a late watcher. The band 
was divided into five partes, so that the watche and wards 
came aboute every fifth nyght and every fifth daye, of the 
which watche and wards we had five governors ; the first was 
Mr. Reade, and Wyllyam Knolly s for his learning accompany ed 
hym, the second was Mr. Morton, the third was Mr. Wyl- 
ford,the fourthe was Barrett, Mr. Reade's lieutenant, and the 
fifth was Weste, his ansygne-bearer, a verie sufficient and 
carefull man also. This Queue's chamber at Carlyll had a 
wyndow lokyng oute towardes Skotland, the barrs wherof 
being filed asonder, oute of the same she myght have 
ben lett downe, and then she had playne grounds before 
her to pass into Skotland. But nere unto the same wyndow 
we founde an olde postern doore, that was dammed upp 
with a ramper of earth of the inner syde, of twenty foot 
broade and thirty foot deepe, betweene two walls ; for the 
comoditie of which postern for our sallie to that wyndow 
wyth readye watche and warde, we dyd cutt into that ram- 
pier in forme of stayre with a turning aboute downe to the 
sayde postern, and so opened the same, without the which 
devise we coulde not have watched and warded this Quene 
there so safely as we dyd. Altho there was another wyndow 
of her chamber for passing into an orchard within the towne 

* Bolton Castle was a house of Lord Scrope's. 



1568.] MARY AT BOLTON CASTLE. 291 

wall, and so to have slipped over the town wall, that was very 
dangerous, but these matters I can better tell you at my re- 
turn, upon a rude plate that I have made thereof. Now if 
you like well of our removing of this Queen hither, then I pray 
you consider that your cold assistance in backing of us to the 
acheving of this enterprise that had so many difficulties 
therein, is worthy of no praise at all ; but although a foolle's bolt 
be soon shot, yet I dare not tell you all that I think herin. 
Now I trust you will return me home forthwith, because I 
see no reason nor grounds of my staying here any longer ; 
for as touching the defraying of the charges, Vernon the 
clarke here being a sufficient careful and honest man, 
having his proportion set down almost certain, (which wol 
be partly abridged by my departing hence,) woll easily dis- 
charge his duty in that behalf. And so I pray your help, 
that either I may serve as a cipher in agryme* at the court, 
I mean to occupy a place there, or that I may be dismissed 
to the cart, which is fitter for me. And thus, with my Lord 
Scrope's hearty commendations and mine, I shall commytt 
you to God. From Bolton Castle, the 16th of Julie, 1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

Postscript. The charges of removing of this Queue hither 
was somewhat the larger because we were driven to hire 
four little cars, and twenty carriage horses, and twenty 
three saddle horses for her women and men ; the which was 
well accomplished upon the sudden, to her commodity and 
satisfaction. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 

I trussed up the packet herewith enclosed jester night 
late, to have ben sent away this morning, and after that at 
one of the clock after midnight came your packet of the 
12th hereof; and according to her Highness letter, at nine of 

* Algorithm, the old name for Arithmetic. 

V -2 



292 CONDUCT OF MARY'S PARTY. [AUG. 

the clockethis morning, before the Queue was readie, having 
access unto her, I declared to her grace what offences her 
Hyghnes had conceved by hostile enterprises of her partie. 
Wherunto she answered, that her partye was appoynted to 
gather and assemble before my Lorde Herrys' comyng, to de- 
fend themselffes and to impeach the parliament, and that my 
Lorde Herrys' comyng unto them was no assurance that my 
Lorde of Murray e wold not by parliament confiscate them, 
and execute the prysoners that were in his hands, untyll 
her Hyghnes' letter came unto her grace, affyrming that nothing- 
should be done in that parliament prejudiciall to her or her 
partye. Immediately after the receipt of which letter, she 
sayth she sent a specyall man to my Lorde Herrys' and to 
the rest of her party, for the due observation of her Hyghnes' 
pleasure ; and sayth, her partie wil be quyet according, not- 
withstanding theyr gathering of forces. But she sayth her 
adversaries, namely, my Lorde of Morton's own servants (ten 
days synce my Lorde Herrys' comyng home) hav,e spoyled 
the Lorde Skarling's brother of sixty head of beefs and of 
other cattyll, the which my Lorde Herrys warranted to be 
returned from the border to the sayd Lorde Skarling's brother's 
house not farr from Edinboroghe without spoyle, synce her 
Hyghnes had ordered hostilities to cease. And as touching the 
extract of Mr. Drury's letter, she sayth she wrote from Carlyll to 
her borderers of Tevidale, and of the easte marches, autho- 
rising them to annoy e her adversaries in Skotland onely. And 
synce my Lorde Herrys' coming, she sayth that she hath 
wylled them to ceasse hostilities; but she sayth it is hard for 
her to rule thieves at this present. 

She seiideth Bortyke nowe to her Hyghnes, and she hath 
written presently to my Lorde Herrys agayne for staye of her 
partie from all hostilities ; and she hath desired me to wryte to 
hym also. But my Lorde ScroOpe presently going to Carlyll, (for 
the accomplyshment of her Hyghnes' pleasure as occasion 
serveth,) woll admonish hym suffyciently herein. As for the 
matters of Skotland, I refer them to God's providence, as too 



1568.] CHARACTER OF MARY. 

intricate matters for me to deal withal. But yett surely 
I must never commend this Quene's policy, her ready wit 
and her constant courage in all seasons. At our first coming 
to Carlyll, she fed and comforted her party with hope of 
aid out of France, with familiar loving and hearty litres 
and messages, and with remembrances of her rewards to be 
gratefully bestowed to her assured friends according to her 
accustomed liberality ; and to the Hambletons privately she 
did dedicate herselffe, as in whom she had her whole delight 
and trust. And to such as she wold fain have to be her 
friends, she made them believe they were her friends in 
hart, howsoever they were drawn away otherwise. And when 
she saw that her daily conferences and comfortings should 
cease by her coming from Carlyll, then she gave out that her 
coming thence was for the best, and that her Highness wold 
do for her, howsoever her counsel was disposed. And to 
make the Hambletons sure unto her, she made an instru- 
mental writing, assigning thereby* the Duke of Shatilleroe 
to have her whole authority until her return into Scot 
land. And in this mean time she plied her Highness with 
thunderyngs and great countenances, although with grateful 
conditions and promises : and at the last my Lord Herrys' 
message hath ben set forth with such a triumphant blast, 
that it hath choked a great many in Skotland to her side. 
So that it seems the countenance of England sways the 
realm of Skotlande at this day. Nevertheless this Queen, 
like a wise prince, makes semblance to her Highness and 
wold persuade us how that this continuance and increase of 
her party in Skotland is of mere dutiful love they do bear 
unto her : but she knows all their humours, and discovers 
all the particular causes of such as have or do stand with 
her, and who be merely hers assured for her own sake, who 
for the French sake, who for the Hambleton's title and cause, 
and who be observers and followers of time. 

I am glad of your bettered news of the matters of Count 
Lodowykc. I must nodes commend the artificial usage of 



294 STATE OF SCOTLAND. [AUG. 

your copper mynes, but hereof when I speake with you. I 
praye you have an eye to the conveyance of our letters, for 
one here was in hand with one of my men for the prynt of 
my scale in waxe, and here is a goldsmyth attending on this 
Quene. Thus my Lord Scroope and I, with our most hartie 
commendations, shall commyt you to God. From Bolton 
Castle, the 16th of August, at ... after noone, 1568. 

Yours assured, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

Postscript. I dyd read to this Quene so much of her 
Hyghnes' letter as her commandment was I should declare 
unto her, and no more. 



SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

.Right honorable, my servant is now arrived from Edin- 
burgh, who hath continued there from the 17th hereof till this 
present day ; in which tyme occurred the accidents in this 
manner, viz. : That upon the same day, being the second day 
of their parliament, it was not knowne to the Regent and his 
side at Edenburghe that the Earle of Huntley lingering 
about Fife and Angus, was above fyve hundred men, and that 
he would not come forward, but had commanded his people 
to staye, which were in Edenburghe entertayned with great 
joye. But the next day it was advertised that he was to the 
number of two thousand and more, and that he meant to 
burne St. Johnstons or Dundee, which he more bruted of 
color then of certaine purpose to execute, to th'intent he 
might with lesse impeachment passe to Glasco to joyne with 
the Earle of Argile and the Lord Fleminge, who were there 
aryved the same daye with fiftene hundred men, and did, and 
I think yet do, besiege the castle thereof, which is defended 
with three score persons. These arrived to be declared to 
the Regent in one day, and almost at one instant, which 
moved them for that tyme to dissolve the parliament, and the 



1568.] STATE OF SCOTLAND. 295 

next to send some forces against th'Earle of Huntley to 
impeach his secret purpose to come to Sterlinge. It is as- 
suredlie hoped this misadventure of th'Earle of Huntley' s hath 
discouraged the further process of the concerted enterprise. 
Nevertheless, they do yet at Glasco persevere. But upon the 
defeat of the Earl of Huntley, the Regent hath prorogued 
the parliament, and having forfeited yet none but gentlemen 
to the number of fifteen (?) or thereabouts, hath sent to 
the Earl of Arguile and all the rest that if any of them 
will come in and acknowledge the King and his authority, 
he shall be received. But if they proceed in their contempt 
and disobedience, that then it shall be too late to offer it. 
And in this state rests the substance of their doings yet 
discovered. 

The Lord Harrys is returned back from his confederates, 
much to the discontentation of the Earl of Huntley. But 
of late he sent letters of his proper writing to the Earl of 
Huntley, with a copy of a letter written from the Queue's 
Majesty my sovereign, purporting, as appears, some man- 
ner of comfort to the Queen and her side, as that the 
holding of this parliament should not in any way prejudice 
her or her causes. Which letters were intercepted and brought 
to the Regent, who hath well considered the same. And as 
seems, though his adverse parties take great comfort thereat, 
yet he judges the meaning thereof to be more niilde towards 
him then their construction. 

Of late the Regent hath intercepted letters written from 
the Queen to the Lord Fleminge and others, wherein she 
uses all good words of comfort to precede in their secret 
purposes against the rebels.* These and many other like 
do keep the people in Scotland in such distracted minds, 

* Mary was still playing a double part openly, she ordered her 
party to lay down their arms, if the other party would do the same ; 
but secretly she encouraged them to continue their attempts, trusting 
that the others, confiding in her outward promises, would be taken 
/inawares. 



296 INTRIGUES OF MARY'S FRIENDS. [AUG. 

that whatsoever they do for the tyme yield unto, they 
minde it not with any constancy. He hath likewise inter- 
cepted letters from Mr. John Louiston, written to his father, 
who WTiteth that the Quene did let him see a letter which 
was written out of Fraunce, much to her comforte ; that the 
King drawing nowe to some more quietnes in his countrey, 
would releve her with sixe thousand Frenchmen. This, 
though in good judgements it may in this tyme be accounted 
for a vaine expectation, yet being used thus, it serveth the 
purpose they employ it to ; and therefore, if such manner of 
writing were for a tyme restrained, it might perchance in the 
ende breede more quietnes. But that which the Regent hath 
most care of, is of advertisement he hath lately gotten from 
France, which being a thing most likely, he giveth like credit; 
that George Douglas,t by the helpe of the Duke and the 
Lord Arbroth, hath taken up a thousand Frenchmen to be 
paid by them (as it is collected) out of the Queue's dowrie, 
which they have receaved even nowe in France, and to con- 
duct them hither about the middle or the latter end of this 
next morreth, with the Duke himself. And this he maketh 
great care of, as he/thinks likely to take place ; for that though 
the money and men be appointed by the French, yet they 
may avoyde it, as that it were not their intention to assist 
directly with money and men; but to give her her dowry, 
they cannot deny it, being her due ; arid as to the men, they 
will not seem to know thereof, or knowing therof will not re- 
strain them from seeking adventure at forrayne chardges. So 
that under this color, this kind of indirecte dealing may both 
prejudice their estate, and by consequence come nere us 
here. Wherefore, understanding thus much, I thought well 
to advertise your Honor, who if your wisdome shall think it 
meete to be imparted to the Queue's Majesty and my Lords 
of the counsell, it may be done at your pleasure. God ever 



* Scott, in the Abbot, supposes George Douglas to have been killed 
at the battle of Langside. 



1568.] PLOT TO RESCUP; MARY. 297 

keep your Honour. From Berwick, this present 21st of 
August, 1568. 

Your Honor's humbly at commandment, 

W. DRURY- 



THE EARL OF MURRAY TO SIR JOHN FORSTER. 

After my most hearty commendations, it is reported to me 
as truth, that the Lord of Fernyhurst looked continually upon 
the 14th, 15th, and 16th of this present, when the Queen 
should be conveyed to his house forth of Bolton, where she 
presently remains, by the means of some Englishmen. 
The chief enterpriser whereof is thought to be your friend 
George Heron. 

Of the which report made we determined at the first to 
make you warning, because we are much assured ye wold be 
right sorry that any sik accident should be brought to pass 
in sik a manner, and principally your sovereign, but in 
apparent endanger this estate, and perturb the quietness 
of the whole realm. So being thus far informed, we dout 
not but you will advertise my Lord Scrope and Mr. Vice 
Chamberlain,* that has in charge to attend upon her. But 
else will try sa far in the matter as you thynk good, be reason 
of your friend that is thus delayted 1 to be a partener or rather 
a chief instrument of this stratagem. Thus for this present we 
commit you in the protection of God. 

At Edinburgh, the 21st of August, 1568. 
Your right assured friend, 

JAMES, REGENT. 

* Sir Francis Knollys. ! Reported. 



298 STATE OF THE BORDERS. [OCT. 



SIR JOHN FORSTER* TO CECIL. 

May it please your Honor to be advertised, that the 23rd 
daie of September laste, my Lord of Hunsden f and I met 
the Warden of Scotland and Mr. Ballentyne, the Justice 

*Sir John Forster, of Bamborough Abbey, Northumberland,, who held 
the post of Warden of the middle marches for thirty-seven years. 
Scott says his proper name was Forrester. He was also Deputy-go- 
vernor of Berwick, and governor of Bamborough Castle. Sir John had 
much trouble at this time with the Scottish clans on the border, who 
were many of them adherents of the party opposed to the regency, and 
not only took the opportunity of the weakness of the government to 
make depredations on the English, but were also encouraged to it by 
the heads of their party in the hope of breaking the peace between 
England and Scotland. When in the preceding year, in July 1567, 
Throgmorton, then in Scotland, complained to the Lords of the turbu- 
lence of the Scottish borderers, their answer was : 

" My Lord Ambassador, as unto the matter of the borders, the Lords 
have given as good order for them as they could devyse to all such 
men as have charge of them : and sure they are, that for the warden- 
sye of the Lord Hume, there is no man of England hath cause to com- 
playne : the lyke they maye saye for the Easte Tyvydall, which is under 
the Lord of Sesforde : as unto ihe West Tyvydall they muste needes 
confesse the principall murderers of the Kinge (as the Lord of Ormes- 
ton with his adherents) be the pryncypall doers of myschief upon the 
borders, which they commit of purpose to bring the realmes into un- 
quietnes, the uttermost refuge that they have now to keepe themselves 
from answering to the lawe here. For they know they be put to the 
home, and can have no being in Scotlande, if justice take place." Sir 
Nicholas adds, " These Lordes do desyre, that the myschiefes and 
outrages of Bodwell's faction be not imputed to them : for no men 
would gladlier put their handes to the reformation than they." Letter 
to the Queen, 26th July, in the State Paper Office. 

f Henry Gary, son of William Gary and Lady Mary Boleyn, (the 
sister of Queen Anne Boleyn,) and therefore allied to the Queen by 
blood.He was created Baron of Hunsdon, in Hertfordshire, in the 
1st Eliz. and was at the present time governor of Berwick. He was 
also captain of the Queen's guard, and in 1585, Lord Chamberlain. 
" As he lived in a ruffling time," says Naunton, " so he loved sword 
and buckler men, and such as our fathers were wont to call men of their 



1568.] BUCCLEUGH TAKEN. 299 

Clarke, at a day of march holden at the Rydingborne, where- 
at the same the Warden and the Justice Clarke, who was sent 
from the Regent as special messenger to see justice minis- 
tred for the party of Scotland, they both there refused to an- 
swer or to make redress, either for Ledesdall or for the 
Lord of Buckecleughe, by reason, as they alleged, neither of 
both these two companies were in obedience to the 
authority. I hearing both the said companies so to be ex- 
septet from justice, and flatly denied that any their misde- 
meanours wold be answered, but left at liberty to spoil, 
I thought I could no less do then to have regard thereunto 
in time. I called before me my officers of Tendall and Re- 
desdall, with whom I took such order as I thought might 
not only seine best to meet with the said Ledesdalles and 
Buckcleughe, if they sought to attempt or make any spoil 
upon my sovereign's subjects, within any part of my office. 
And even so did I practise how I might best annoy the said 
Ledesdalles and the Lard of Buckcleughe, in respect of that 
their not being in obedience, w^hereby they might be forced 
the rather to come to order of justice, so as my soveraigne's 
subjects under my rule might much more quietly live with- 
out fear of the robbing them of their goods. 

The matter hath been so delte withal, as at this present 
I have Buckcleughe taken, and thirteen score of his com- 
pany, without loss of any Englishmen, saving six that were 
slain, and of the Scots many slain and hurt. I mind 
to keep him unto the return of the Regent,* to see what 
order and justice will pursue there, and as the matter shall 

hands ; of which sort he had many brave gentlemen who followed him, 
and yet was he not taken for a popular and dangerous person. And 
this is one that stood amongst the togati, of an honest stout heart, and 
such a man as upon occasion would have fought for his prince and 
country ; for he had the charge of the Queen's person, both in the 
court and in the camp at Tilbury." 

* The Regent was in England attending on the commission which, 
was to examine into the cause of Mary. 



300 STATE OF THE BORDERS. [OCT. 

then fall forth between the authorityes of Scotland and me 
for the same, so shall I farther advertise your Honor thereof. 
As knoweth the Almighty God, who have you in his most 
holy kepyng. At my house, neighe Alnwick, the 14th daie 
of October, 1568. 

Your Honor's humble to commande, 

JOHN FORSTER. 



SIR JOHN FORSTER TO CECIL. 

It may please your Honor to be advertised, that whera^s 
I advertised my Lord of Northefolk's grace upon the Lorde 
of Buckcleughe, I do understand by his Grace's letter, that 
my Lord Regent and my Lord of Morton are in doubte that 
his taking should give occassion to the breache of the bor- 
ders, and procure more unquietnes ; but as I have advertised 
his Grace therin, so I did your Honor in the like manner, 
that it was one evill deede well done, for before the borderers 
the moste parte of them stode in lyttel awe of the Regent, and 
wold not answer to England, but as they liste, and not accor- 
ding to justice. I will undertake that my Lord Regent shall 
iynd the borderers in better obedience than he left them, and 
will take in hand that the marches within my charge, and 
those of Scotland against me, shall continue in good quietnes, 
until his Lordshipp returne into Scotland. The 19th day 
of this instant, I met with the Lord of Cessford at Elter- 
borne, who was in company with the Lord of Farnyherst, 
Sir Andrew Carr, the Sheriff of Tevydall, and other the gen- 
tlemen of that border, and have there more justice offered and 
done, than I have had these two yeres passed. 

There was delyveries made of all the bills filed and sworne, 
and have appointed meetings for the answering of all the at- 
temptats commytted and done since the meeting of the com- 
missioners at Carlisle and Dumfrese untyll this daie. 

There was at the same meeting one Sir Walter Scote, of 
Howepaslay, knight, a nere frende of Buckclcughe's, and there 



1568.] BUCCLEUGH IN CUSTODY. 301 

put in a bill for the taking of Buckcleughe, and the spoils 
done to his friends, servants, and tenants. And there be- 
fore the Warden of Scotland and the rest of the gentlemen, 
upon opening of the occasion and manner of doing thereof, 
the said Sir Walter Scote said the bill was not to be answered, 
and there was no way with the Lord of Buckcleughe and the 
rest but to seek by frendshipps for his and their reliefs. And 
although I mean not to let Buckcleughe home but upon 
bond, yet shall the matter be so used that my Lord Regent 
shall have no cause to mislike thereof, and that Buckcleughe 
shall understand he has and shall be better dealt withal 
for the Regent's sake. And where before I stood in dout 
of the borders, I am now assured that there shall be nothing 
but good quietness and justice to go forwards. Other news 
worthy of advertisement here is none, as knows God, who 
have your Honour in his most holy tuition ! At my house, 
nigh Alnwick, the 2 1st of October, 1568. 

Your Honor's humble to command, 

JOHN FORSTER. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO CECIL. 
(3 Dec. 1568. Extract.) 

I have received your letter of the 23rd by post, and another 
of the 25th, at Mr. Morton's hands, and you do well to ad- 
monish me to be circumspect that this Queen escape not, wher- 
in slights you say are more suspect than force, and in this be- 
half it seems that your informers there are of more credit than 
I am, for I have feared and do rather fear force against our 
watch that is without our hows, because our small number 
ber of soldiers woll not suffer it to be strong, although all our 
soldiers watch their course every fifth night, that is to 
say, ten every night, but we have three sundry places 
watched within this hows, so that the watch without this 
hows can be but four at the most : and to mete with this 



302 MARY AT BOLTON CASTLE. [DEC. 

danger I wold have had the other ten of Mr. Read's band, but 
it is over-ruled agaynst me uppon what credite I know not. 
But sure I am, I was not credited herin, as by her Hyghnes' 
answer and yours to my letters may well appeare. Never- 
theless, I have given place, as reason is and duty byndes, and 
yet I thynk if anything shold happen amisse, my circumspec- 
tion shold sooner be blamed than that the fault shold be layde 
where it ought. 

We all agree herin, that this is an inconvenient and dan- 
gerous place for this Quene to tarry in ; and in respect herof, 
you spake of her removing, and her removing is wished, arid 
specially that we here shold take upon us to remove her (un- 
willing therto) withoute sufficient authoritie as we did from 
Carlylle. But as I have told you alreadie, this Quene knoweth 
that we had no such authoritie to remove her from Carlylle 
as we then by circumstance and countenance pretended, 
wherupon she hath playnly sayde she woll no more be so ad- 
vised by us, and she also now sayth that we shall bynd her 
hande and foote and forcibly carrie her hence, before she 
woll remove furder into this realme. But yet if she shall see 
her Majestie's precise commandment for her removing, with- 
owte respect of her wyll, then I thynk she woll yield thereto 
quietly, and yet she is so loathe to remove her hence more 
into the realme, that as long as great wordes or great counte- 
nance may serve her, I think she woll not remove, for so she 
dyd at Carlylle, which is a manyfest argument that this also 
is no safe place for her to remayne at. 

***** 



QUEEN ELIZABETH TO MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 

Madame, whilst your cause* hath bene here treated upon, 
we thought it not nedefull to write any thing thereof unto you, 

* After her detention in England, Mary had agreed to have her 
cause tried before commissioners from both sides ; but when she saw 



1568.] ELIZABETH WRITES TO MARY. 303 

supposing always that your commissioners wold thereof ad- 
vertise as they saw cause ; and sithen they have broken this 
conference, by refusing to make answer, as they say, by your 
commandment, and for that purpose they return to you, 
although we think you shall by them perceive the whole 
proceeding, yet we cannot but let you understand by these 
our letters, that as we have been very sorry of long time, for 
your mishaps and great troubles, so find we our sorrows 
now doubled in beholding such thin ges as are produced to prove 
yourself cause of all the same. And our grief herein is in- 
creased, in that we did not think at any time, to have seen or 
heard such matter of so great appearances and moment to 
charge and condemn you. Nevertheless, both in friendship, 
nature, and justice, we are moved to cover these maters, 
and stay our judgement, and not to gather any sense thereof 
to your prejudice, before we may hear of your direct answer 
thereunto, according as your commissioners understand our 
meaning to be, which at their request is delivered to them in 
writing. And as we trust they will advise you for your 
honour to agree to make answer, as we have mentioned 
them, so surely we cannot but as one prince and near cousin 
regarding another, most earnestly as we may in terms of 
friendship require and charge you not to forbear from answer 
ing. And for our part we are heartily sorry and dismayed to 
find such matter of your charge, so shall we be as heartily 
glad and well content to here of sufficient matter for your 
discharge ; and although we doubt not, you are well certified 
of the diligence and care of your ministers having your com- 
mission, yet can we, not besides an allowance generally of 
them, specially note to you your good choice of the bearer 
the Bishop of Rosse, who has not only faithfully and 
wisely, but also so carefully and dutifully, for your honour and 

that evidence was brought against her which she had hoped would 
have been concealed, she caused her commissioners to break the con- 
ference, upon which Elizabeth wrote to her the present letter. 



304 RELIGIOUS WARS IN FRANCE. [FEB. 

weale, behaved himself, and that both privately and publikely, 
as we cannot but in this sorte commende him unto you as 
we wishe you had suche devoted discrete servants ; for in our 
judgement, we thinke, ye have not any in loyalty and faith- 
fulness overrnatche him: and thus we are the bolder to write, 
considering we take it the beste triall of a good servaunte, to 
be in adversitie, out of which we wish you to be delivered, 
by the justification of your innocency. And so trusting to 
heare shortly from you, we make an ende. Given at Hamp- 
ton Court, under our signet, the 21st of December, 1568, in 
the eleventh yeare of our reigne. 

Your good Sistar and Cousin, 

ELIZABETH R. 



SIR HENRY NORRIS TO CECIL * 

Considering, right honorable, the aptnes of this tyme, I 
thought it my bounden duty to advertise your Honor that it 
is determined, as I can learne, not to ende the controversy 
by battaile, if it may be, but rather by delayes to weary the 
adverse partie, which pollicie what it may do in continuance 
of tyme, God knoweth, wherefore the aforesaid consydered as 
also the importance of the thing not only in this realme, but 
to all other favourers of God's cause, I wish your Honor to 
consider of it, whether now the demand of Callice were not 
verie expedient, and surely, Sir, (under your Honor's corrcc- 

* The religious war in France during the year 1569, raged with great 
violence. This, commonly known as the third civil war, originated in 
a treacherous attempt by the Queen-mother to seize upon the Prince 
of Conde and the Admiral Coligny. They received intelligence of their 
danger, fled to Rochelle, the stronghold of the Protestants, and were 
there joined by Jane, Queen of Navarre, with her infant son, and others 
of their party. The Catholics gained the victory of Jarnac, where the 
Prince of Conde was slain, on the 13th March, and afterwards, in the 
same year, that of Moncontour. 



1569.] DESIGNS OF FRANCE. 305 

tion,) I think you should now have reason at their hands 
more than aforetimes, which if it did not take good effect for 
yourselves, yet surly in my opinion it should be a mean to 
make peace betwixt the French King and the Protestants of 
France, otherwise I much doubt the service of the Prince of 
Condo and the Admiral. And further, I think that so apt 
time is not to be had in our days, this omitted. Whereof, 
having put your Honour in mind, trusting you will have the 
same in remembrance, I leave the further consideration there- 
of to your most grave and wise judgment. 

Sir, being the 7th of this instant at the court, an earnest 
suitor in the behalf of the poor men of Mercolles who 
surely be in great misery, requiring the Quene-mother 
to have no less consideration of them than the Quene's 
Majestic my mestres had to a number of the King's subjects 
when peace was concluded twixt their Majesties, amongst 
which was one John Rybault, a man of more importance for 
his experience and knowledge, then all these, albeit that, 
contrary to his alleadgeance, being then her Highness pen- 
sioner, yet he sought to conveye from her Majestic certain 
hostages to her great discontentation, yet notwithstanding as 
soon as the King her son did write to her Majestic in 
his behalf, his release was forthwith granted, which con- 
sidered, I trusted that she would not stick to grant this her 
Majestie'sr equest, being both reasonable and condescended 
unto at the concluding the peace twixt their Majesties, 
that the prisoners on each party should be set at liberty. 
Whereunto she answered, that she thought, and was assured, 
that the King her son, who then was sick in his bed, would 
not deny his good sister any thing that he thought might 
be acceptable to her Majestic, and she would not fail 
to make him forthwith privy to my demand and request, and 
return me a speedy answer, which I will not fail eamestlie 
to travail in till I bring it by Godde's help to some end. 

It may please your Honour to be further advertised, that 
the 5th of this present, the Quene-mother being in the 

VOL. i. x 



306 DESIGNS OF FRANCE. [FEB. 

towne at Mounser de Strosse's house, my next neighbour, 
she came through a close into my garden, whereof I being 
advertised, wente towardes her, where, after she had perused 
the close out of which she found a dore into the fields, 
whereof I have a key, and was sometime wonte to passe that 
waie into the open fields, for which commoditie I rather hire 

my house, and tooke a lease thereof for yeares, then 

for anie other belonging to it, as also to be out of the corrupt 
ayre of the towne, which surely is such as none other to be 
compared to Paris, which after she had well viewed, she said, 
she muche marvailed I durst in this troublesome tyme lye so 
void of neighbours. Whereunto I answered, that I thought 
myself here under the King her sonne's protection, no lesse 
then if I were in the towne, trusting also that their care was 
no lesse of me for her Majestie's sake, whose place I here 
held, then anie of them of my calling within the towne, 
whereof she said I might be well assured. Thus ending this 
conversation for that present. After my negociation ended, 
she againe fell into talke of my house, required me I would 
come into the towne, where lodgings mete should be provided 
for me, and a verie commodious . . . lest some inconvenience 
growe to me from the mutinous multitude, which should be 
no small greife to her and the Kinge her sone, which surelie, 
though it shal be greatlie to my hinderance, having made my 
provision there, yet being by her thus warned, I must be 
forced, if she require further, to do it. 

This courte is greatlie abashed, theire King sicke, theire 
realme divided, and the Spanishe newes latelie arrived, from 
whence it is now thought no suche aide shall come as was 
hoped, for the bruite goeth that there are three thousand 
roysters coming to the King under the conduct of Volardus 
van Mansfeilde, and eight hundreth more under the conduct 
of the young Count Ringrave, which, as it is said, be come to 
Verdon. The King of Spaine doth arme, if the late newes 
be not a lett thereof, eight thousand footemen, not knowen 
whither to be employed, hither or into Flanders. 



]569.] MARY AT TUTBURY. 307 

The armies doth nothing worthy advertisement. Bloys 
is not yet won, though there be two great breaches, and 
they have endured three assaults, at which hath been a great 
number lost. 

The 8th of this present there came to this court news that 
the Cardinal of Lorraine escaped very hardly in Reigns,* 
where going into his coach he was shot at with a harque- 
buse, which missing him, struck one of his called Ince, an 
Italian, and striking him through the body, he fell dead, 
which fact was done the ... of this present. 

Thus ceasing further to trouble your Honour, I committ the 
same to Godd's merciful protection. 

From Paris, this 9th of February, 1568. 

Your honor's assured to command, 

HENRY NORREYS. 



NICHOLAS WHITE f TO CECIL. 

Sir, when I came to Colsell, a town in Chester way, I un 
derstood that Tutbury CastellJ was not above half a day's 
journey out of my way. Finding the wind contrary, and 
having somewhat to say to my Lord Shrewsbury touching 
the county of Wexford, I took post-horses and came 
thither about five of the clock in the evening, where I was 
very friendly received by the Earl. 

The Queen of Scots, understanding by his Lordship that 

* Rheims. 

t Nicholas White was the second son of Sir James White, of 
Waterford, and was at this time one of the council of Ireland. He 
was afterwards knighted, and made Master of the Rolls there. 

J Mary was taken from Bolton to Tutbury Castle in the January of 
the present year, and was there placed under the care of the Earl of 
Shrewsbury. 

George Talbot, sixth Earl of Shrewsbury. On the arraignment 
of the Duke of Norfolk, he was made Lord High Steward of England, 
and, after his execution, Earl Marshal. He died in 1590. 

x2 



308 MARY AT TUTBURY. [FEB. 

a servant of the Queue's Majesty of some credit was come to 
the house, semed desyrous to speak with me, and thereupon 
came forth of her privy chamber into the presence chamber 
where I was, and in very curteise manner bade me welcome, 
and asked of me how her good syster did. I told her Grace 
that the Quene's Majestic (God be praised) did very well, 
saving that all her felicities gave place to some natural pas- 
sions of grief, which she conceaved for the deathe of her 
kinswoman and goode servant the Lady Knollys, and how by 
that occasion her Highnes fell for a while from a prince want- 
ing nothing in this world to private mourning, in which soli- 
tary estate being forgettfull of her owne helthe, she tooke 
colde, wherwith she was much troubled, and wherof she was 
well delivered. 

This much paste, she hearde the Englishe service with a 
booke of the psalmes in Englishe in her hand, which she 
showed me after. When service was done, her Grace fell 
in talke with me of sundry matters, from six to seven of the 
clocke, beginning first to excuse her ill Erigli she, declaring 
herself more willing than apt to lerne that language ; how 
she used translations as a meane to attayne it ; and that Mr. 
Vice-Chamberlayne* was her good schole-master. From this 
she returned back agayne to talk of my Lady Knollys. And 
after many speeches past to and fro of that gentilwoman, I, 
perceyving her to harpe much upon her departure, sayd, that 
the long absence of her husband (and specially in that arti- 
cle,) together with the fervency of her fever, did greatly fur- 
ther her end, wanting nothing els that either art or man's 
helpe could devise for her recovery, lying in a prince's court 
nere her person, where every houre her carefull eare under- 
stoode of her estate, and where also she was very often visited 
by her Majestie's owne comfortable presence; and sayd 
merely that, although her Grace were not culpable of this 
* Sir Francis Knollys. Lord Burleigh has noted in his diary, on the 
3rd of February, " Sir Francis Knolles came from the Scotts Quene 
at Tutbury. Mr. Henry Knolles went thyther." 



1569.] MARY AT TUTBURY. 309 

accident, yet she was the cause without which their being 
asunder had not happened. She said she was very sorry for her 
death, because she hoped well to have been acquainted with 
her. " I perceive by my Lord of Shrewesbury," said she, 
" that ye go into Irlande, which is a troublesome country, to 
serve my sister there." "I do so, madame; and the chiefest 
trouble of Irland proceeds from the north of Scotland, through 
the Earl of Argile's supportation." Whereunto she little 
answered. 

I asked her how she liked her change of ayre. She said 
if it might have pleased her good sister to let her remain 
where she was, she would not have removed for change of 
ayre this time of the year ; but she was the better contented 
therewith, because she was come so much the nearer to her 
good sister, whom she desired to see above all things, if it 
might please her to grant the same. I told her grace that 
although she had not the actual, yet she had always the ef- 
factual presence of the Queue's Majestic by her great bounty 
and kindness, who, in the opinion of us abroad in the world, 
did ever perform towards her the office of a gracious prince, 
a natural kinswoman, a loving sister, and a faithefull friend ; 
and howe much she had to thank God, that, after the pass- 
ing of so many perils she was safely arrived into such a 
realm, as where all we of the common sort deemed she had 
good cause, through the goodness of the Quene's Majestic, to 
think herself rather princelike entertained, then hardly re- 
strained of any thing that was fit for her Grace's estate ; and 
for my own part did wish her Grace mekely to bow her 
mind to God, who hath put her into this school to learn 
to know him to be above kings and princes of this world ; 
with such other like speeches as time and occasion then 
served, which she very gentilly accepted a and confessed that 
indeed she had great cause to thank God for sparing of her, 
and great cause likewise to thank her good sister for this 
kindly using of her. As for contentation in this her present 



310 MARY'S AMUSEMENTS. [FEE 

estate, she would not require it at God's hands, but only pa- 
cience, which she humbly prayd him to give her. 

I asked her Grace, since the weather did cut of all exercises 
abrode, how she passed the tyme within. She sayd that all the 
day she wrought with her needil, and that the diversitie of the 
colors made the worke seme lesse tedious, and continued so long 
at it till very payn did make her to give over ; and with that 
layd her hand upon her left syde and complayned of an old 
grief newely increased there. Upon this occasion she entered 
into a prety disputable comparison betwene karving, painting, 
and working with the needil, affirming painting in her owne 
opinion for the most commendable qualitie. I answered her 
Grace, I could skill of neither of them, but that I have read 
Pictura to be veritas falsa. With this she closed up her 
talke, and bidding me farewell, retyred into her privy cham- 
ber. 

She sayd nothing directly of yourself to me. Nevertheles, 
I have found that which at my first entrance into her presence 
chamber I imagined, which was, that her servant Bethun had 
given her some privye note of me ; for as sone as he espied 
me, he forsake our acquayntance at courte, and repaired 
straight into her privye chamber, and from that forthe we 
could never see him. But after supper, Mr. Harry Knollys 
and I fell into close conference, and he, among other things, 
told me how loathe the Quene was to leave Bolton Castell, 
not sparing to give forthe in speeche that the Secretary* was 
her enemy, and that she mistrusted by this removing he would 
cause her to be made away ; and that her danger was so 
much the more, because there was one dwelling very nere 
Tutbery, which pretended title in succession to the crowne 
of England, meaning the Erie of Huntingdon.^ But when 

* Cecil. 

f Henry Hastings, third Earl of Huntingdon, whom we shall meet 
with a little later as president of the council of the North. He was 
descended by his mother's side from George Plantagenet, Duke of 
Clarence, brother of Edward IV. He died Dec. 14, 1595. 



1569.] DESCRIPTION OF MARY'S PERSON. 311 

her passion was past, as he told me, she said that tho the 
Secretary were not her friend, yet she must say that he was an 
expert wise man, a maintainer of all good laws for the 
government of this realm, and a faithful servant to his mis- 
tres, wishing it might be her luck to get the friendship of so 
wise a man. 

Sir, I durst take upon my death to justify, what manner 
of man Sir William Cecil is, but I know not whence this 
opinion procedes. The living of God preserve her life long, 
whom you serve in singleness of heart, and make all her de- 
syred successors to become her predecessors. * 

But, if I, which in the sight of God bear the Queue's Ma- 
jestie a natural love beside my bounden duty, might give 
advise, there should be very few subjects in this land have 
access to or conference with this lady. For beside that 
she is a goodly personage, and yet in truth not comparable to 
our sovereign, she hath withal an alluring grace, a pretty 
Scottish accente, and a searching wit, clouded with mildness. 
Fame might move some to relieve her, and glory joined to 
gain might stir others to adventure much for her sake. Then 
joy is a lively infective sense, and carries many persuasions 
to the heart, which rules all the rest. Mine own affection 
by seeing the Queue's Majesty our sovereign is doubled, and 
thereby I guess what sight might work in others. Her hair 
of itself is black, and yet Mr. Knollys told me that she wears 
hair of sundry colours. 

In looking upon her cloth of estate, I noted this sentence 
embrodred, En ma Jin est mon commencement, which is a 
ryddil I understand not. The greatest personage in house 
about her is the Lord of Levenston and the Lady his wife, 
which is a fair gentlewoman, and it was told me both Pro 
testants. She hath nine women more, fifty persons in house- 

* Nicholas White's expression is somewhat obscure he wishes that 
all who desire by Elizabeth's death to occupy her place, may die 
before her. 



312 STATE OF THE COUNTRY. [FEB. 

hold, with ten horses. The Busshope of Rosse lay then thre 
myles off in a towne called Burton-upon-Trent, with another 
Scottishe lorde,* whose name I have forgotten. My Lord of 
Shrewesbury is very carefull of his charge, but the Quene 
over- watches them all, for it is one of the clocke at least every 
night ere she go to bed. 

The next morning I was up timely, and viewing the scite 
of the house, which in myne opinion standes much like 
Windesor, I espied two halbard men without the castell wall 
searching underneathe the Queue's bed-chamber windowe. 

Thus have I troubled your Honor with rehersall of this 
long colloquy hapned betweene the Quene of Scotts and me, 
and yet had I rather in my owne fancy adventure thus to en- 
comber you, then leave it unreported, as near as my memory 
could serve me, though the greatest part of our communication 
was in the presence of my Lord of Shrewesbury and Mr. 
Harry Knollys; praying you to beare with me therein, among 
the number of those that load you with long frivolous letters. 
And so I humbly take my leave, awaiting an easterly winde. 
From West Chester, the 26th of February. 

All these cuntreys which I have past from London to the 
sea bank lie in great welthe and quietness ; each man in- 
creaseth his owne, and no degree dare offend the law. They 
pray for the Quene with an universall voyce, and that peace 
may continue. Here is a faction in Chesshire betwene Sir 
Hughe Chamleyt and Sir Edward Fitten,J which hath made 

* The Bishop of Ross is said to have chosen Burton for his resi- 
dence that he might be less under the surveillance of the Earl of 
Shrewsbury's servants and retainers. The Lord, whose name White 
had forgotten, was perhaps Lord Kilwynnie. 

f Sir Hugh Cholmondeley, of Cholmondeley in Cheshire, who died 
in 1596, and was buried at Malpas, in the said county, where his 
monument is still preserved See Ormerod's Cheshire. 

+ Sir Edward Fitton, of Gawsworth, in Cheshire, who was shortly 
after this made Lord President of Connaught and Thomond, and was 
afterwards Treasurer of Ireland. He was buried in St. Patrick's 
Church, in Dublin, September 21, 1579. 



1569.] RELIGIOUS WARS IN FRANCE. 313 

some division. I would have written to my Lord of Leyces- 
la, but that this messenger could not stay. 

Your Honor's assuredly to command, 

N. WHITE. 



THE EARL OF LEICESTER TO RANDOLPH.* 

Mr. Randolphe, I cannot oft send though I have oft de- 
syred to hear from you. I trust you be well, and I pray God 
we may shortly see you here. The news of the beginning 
of these troubles in France and such like I wrote unto you 
at length, which I doubt not is come to your hands before 
this. How they have continued since you shall briefly hear. 

The King has been these two months about Metz in 
Lorraine, to impeach the entry of the Duke of Bipountef 
who is set forward by the common assent of all the princes 
Protestants in Germany, with twelve thousand horsemen, and 
twenty-five thousand footmen, to assist the Protestants in 
France, and to make some final end of their garboils. The 
King's brother, Monsieur D'Anjou, doth lye likewise with an 
army in another quarter, upon the river of Loire, to make head 
against the Prince and the Admiral, who possesseththePoictou, 
Rochelle, and the country thereabouts. To whose aid the 
Viscount of Montalban, with an army of ten thousand men, 
are coming, and I think by this are joined. But the Prince 
and the Admiral going to receive them with certain horse 
men and no footmen, were set upon by the way, by the 
King's brother, and his power beside Coignac, the thirtene 
day of March last ; in which conflict was slain on both 
side, as we hear not above four hundred men. And the 
Prince of CondeJ through his overmuch hardiness and little 

* Randolph was at this time employed on an embassy to the Emperor 
of Moscovy. 

t The Duke of Deux Fonts, who died near Limoges in June. 
+ Lewis, Prince of Condo, who headed the Huguenots. 



314 FRANCE AND FLANDERS. [MAY, 

regard to follow the Admirall's advise had there his arme 
broken with a courrire shotte, and so being overthrowen from 
his hors, was taken and after murthered, as it is credibly re- 
ported. 

Robert Stuart, Chastellier, and certaine other worthy gen- 
tlemen to the number of six were lykewise taken and slayne, 
as the French tearme it, de sangfroid. 

The^Vdmirall continueth still strong in the field, and doth 
make accompte to joyn shortely with the Duke of Bipount, 
who is already passed the ryver of Soane, in Burgundy, 
maulger the Duke D'Aumalle's heade, from whom he hath 
taken his artillerie. The Queen of Navarre is at Rochelle, 
and her sonne the Prince is in the field with the Adrnirall, 
under whose name and creditte all things shall passe from 
henceforth, as it did while the Prince of Conde was alyve. 
The Vidasme of Chartres, with his wife and familie, is come 
into England uppon a snuife, having shewed himself in this 
last action neither fishe nor fleshe. 

Hitherto of Fraunce, now of Flaunders: the Duke of Alva 
hathe raffled with us ever since Christmas, and not only empri- 
soned our merchants, but also stayed their goods and shippes, 
whereuppon the Queue's Majestic hathe done the lyke here, 
and stayed certayne treasure which by force of weather was 
dry ven uppon the west coast. She hathe likewise armed forthe 
certayne of her shippes to keepe the narrow seas, which 
have taken dyvers of their hulks and therin greate substance 
and treasure, all which is surely kept uppon a reckoning till 
we may see howe matters will fall out betwixt us and them. 

Now a little of Scotland. The Regent having agreed in 
March with the Queue of Scotland's friends (who had assembled 
a greate power against hym, thinking to put all to a day), hathe 
sithens discovered by good meanes it was but a practise to en- 
trappe him, and to work the undoing of him and his friends. 
Whereuppon not without good advise he hath prevented their 
determinations therin, and so wisely handled the matter as 
the Duke of Chastillerault, the Lord Herrys, and certaine 



1569.] LORD WINDSOR IN ITALY. 315 

other of the chief of that party be apprehended and com- 
meted, as we hear, to Edinburgh castle, where they are like 
to remain, I fear me, without means to help themselves or 
the Queen, who, God knows, has broken all the strings 
of her bow. 

For lack of other matter, I end ; and for your farewell, 
pray you to accept my har tie commendations. 

From the Court, the first of May, 1569. 

Your assured friend, 

R. LEICESTER. 

Postscript. You have lost of late two of your good friends, 
that is to say my Lady Knollis and Tamwortibe. 



LORD WINDSOR* TO CECIL. 

Considering by my former letters unto you, that of my well 
or evil doing in this my voyage, I would make you partaker, as 
one of the chiefest of my good friends ; these are to let you 
understand, that the 9th of May I arrived at Naples from 
Malta, the sight whereof, considering the honourable company 
of the Lord Great Master with the caveleridge, (being of all 
nations of Christendom some,) the old ruins of the late 
siege by the Turk, which unto this present are monstrous, 
and last of all, the notable strong and famous fortress of 
new made and begun by that honourable great master, Signor 
de Valet, did yield unto me some recompense, considering 
the trouble and travail had before in Sicillia. The which 
arose in respect I was an Englishman, and affirmed, accord 
ing to my duty, upon my examination, myself subject and 
servant unto the Queen of England, and none les, and a 
forristeiro ; which, since my coming into those countries, had 

* Sir Edward Windsor, third Lord Windsor, who married Lady 
Catherine Vere, daughter of John, sixteenth Earl of Oxford, by his 
first wife Dorothy Neville, daughter of Ralph, Earl of Westmoreland, 
Lord Windsor passed much of his time abroad, and was said to be a 
rigid papist. He died in January, 1575. 



316 THE WARS WITH THE TURKS. [MAY, 

behaved myselfe as becomed me in al respectes. I was an- 
swered, the name of an Englishman, and servant to that 
Quene, &c. was enofe for my imprisonment ; but there was 
more matter to be laid unto me. I answered, my imprison- 
mente, considering it was in respecte of my sovereign Lady, 
was nothyng unto me, considering 1 was ready and willing to 
receive ten times more then that, and wold not think myself 
but happy in so doing. Then he turned his phrase of talke 
of the Queue's Majesty, and said ther was other matters to 
be answered, &c. But for the space of six wekes I had not 
of myn own servantes to wayte on me, not so moche as a 
page, but were severally imprisoned, and in th'end by God's 
helpe delivered. After which tyme, I required to have 
audiense of the Vise-rei, Marques of Piscare, (whom I knew 
in England,) who, upon the speaking with me, used me very 
honorably, causing his captaine of the guard to attend upon 
me, if I wanted anything. 

Afterward I was visited at my lodging with the Marques 
Davola, son and heire unto the Prinsipe de Terra Nova : and 
in his company Don Gaione de Cardona, Generalle of the 
Gallies of Sicilia, and invited several dayes, nowe unto one 
prince, then unto another, for the time I tarried, which was 
not long. 

After which time I wold in no wise be discouraged touch- 
ing my journey to Malta. Wherfore I wente by land to the 
nighest place of passage, which was from Palermo to Pue- 
salla, and being at Puesalla, a tower by the sea-side, where 
I expecting a gaily from Malta, for in sighte daily I 
mighte see the fighte betwene Christians and Turkes, and 
for the moste parte the Christians have the worse, for in 
my sighte there were two shipes taken, the patrones whereof 
scaping by the skif, came to that tower, my abode there, as 
me thoughte, was very long, whiche was for the space of 
twenty-six dayes. 

And for that it shold not be said an Englishman to come 
so far to see Malta, and to have turned back againe, (come 



1569.] THE ARCHDUKE CHARLES. 317 

una core di galena,) I determined rather with a frigate of 
fiftene oars, making my sepulker of that golf, rather then to 
have returned in that manner, and even so passed that canal, 
by God's help, in safety to Malta, upon Good Friday : where 
I was very honourably used, and have brought divers plots of 
the old burgo and the new city, which I reserve in store 
to bestow upon you, at my coming nearer my country. 

The advises here of the eightene galleys, wherein the Com- 
mendator Magior and Marco Antonio Collonna and Pompei 
Collonna, with the tiers of Naples, by reason of tempest, the 
most part of them be drowned, and those that have escaped 
the danger of drowning, so spoiled with the tempest, that 
they were fine to caste out all things ; so as few men in 
those galleys which were driven to land, as some in one place 
called le Isola Pantilaria, where arrived a gaily, the mast, 
the oars broken, and not above fiftene men ]efte alive, the 
tempest continued so long. It is reported, that Mark An- 
tonio Collonna and the Commentator Magor be safe, and 
arrived in Spain. 

The Arche-Duke Charles is arrived in Italic, and hath ben 
at Florens received with great honour. From thens went 
to Ferrari, where was notable triumphs and great rejoicing 
of all parts. From thence the Duke meaning privily to 
go to Venice, and not to be known, was, notwithstanding, 
greatly honoured, from whence, as it is reported, he returns 
unto the emperor. 

As touching my determination here in Italli, my meaning 
was lo have gone unto the baines of Luke in my return this 
spring ; but by reason it was so lunge before my coming to 
Naples, the heats growing so far on, that the baines of Luke 
for this time do not serve to any good effect, I mean, by God's 
grace, to pas the next way to Seen, where, as I understand, 
is the most temperate air in all these parts of Itali, and 
there to rernaine until the latter end of August, and so to Pa- 
dovai on sea again, to those baines whereof I have found so 
much good, as I trust to be a sound man, by my return, of 



318 THE ITALIANS DESPISE ELIZABETH. [JUNE, 

that disese. And thus moste humbly thanking you for your 
favor extended to me in my absence, which doth not only 
bind me to serve you, but al my house, I humbly end. Written 
at Naples, being ready to sette my foote in stirope this next 
morning, the 16th of May, 1569. 

Your assured to commande, 

EDWARDE WINDESOR. 



LORD WINDSOR TO CECIL. 

Mr. Secretarie, passing from Naples to Rome, where for the 
reserving of my mony in banke, as also for the sighte of the 
antigallias, I remained about nine or ten dayes, and being 
nowe arived at Sienna in Tuscana, I am the bolder to write 
of suche avises and occurrences as are in these parties, as 
well touching my Soveraign Lady, as also of the good and 
safe government of our state and contrie, &c. Being in 
Rome the night before I toke my jorny, having conference 
with a Roman of the state of France, he grewe further to 
touche England, and being somewhat moved, burst out and 
said, our Soveraigne Lady and mistris was no Quene. Where- 
upon I answered, " How can that be ?" He replied, and 
said, " for that the Pope in consistoryj had denounced her to 
be any more Quene." I answered, as far as I durst in that 
place, " Do you thinke therby to make the Quene of Eng- 
land not to esteeme of herself as Quene, for this matter ?" 
" Aye, verily," said he, " for further matters depended of it." 
I asked, " What be those ?" " By this menace, being de- 
nounced by the Pope, it is lawfull for all forrein Princes to 
do what in them lietn, for the attaining of that kingdom ; and 
thereby doth give license and pardon unto al men, who shal 
seeme to worke any treason towardes her Majestie's person, 
and thinkes it a meritorious acte in those who shall do it," 
with divers other the like manner of talke, &c. 

I being her Majestie's dutifull subjecte, could do no lesse but 



1569.] NEWS OF ITALY. 319 

advertise this matter unto such a one of her counsel!, who 
hathbothe care of her Majestie's person and of the realm, to 
give her Highness to understand, that as she is a noble, cur- 
teous, and a familiar princes, to have good regard to her per- 
son ; and also to the foresight of those matters pretended, 
&c. 

I mean a little now to touche of the reports ; as touch- 
ing England, first, it is reported the Queue's Majesty to be 
well beforehand, by the having in her custody so many ships 
of merchandises and treasure, as will maintain wars a good 
while. Secondly, that the army of the Duke de Duo Pont, 
is maintained by our Queen, and that the Duke, with his 
army, is sworn to our mistress, whereupon is like to fall out 
present war, &c. On the other side, if the Duke de Duo 
Pont do not well in France, and that the King be once set- 
tled, then have at England at al hands ; for the which cause I 
doubt not but the wise and grave counsel of England doth 
foresee it, &c. 

Of the matters of Spain you have further advises then be 
here. Howsoever the matter goes, I know not ; but out of 
Sissillia and Naples are gon in effect all the soldiers towards 
Spain, and the greater part of them are perished by the way, 
so as in mine opinion there are not left neither in the king 
doom of Naples, nor Sisilia, fiftene hundred soldiers, besides 
those which keep the castles, which never stir from their 
charge, so as, if the Turk were not occupied at home, a 
small army wold do great hurt in Christendom. The 
news from Naples this last post was, that the Vise-roe 
lay at the point of death, if he be not dead. Italy is now 
in great quietness, saving that the Duke of Florens, as is is re- 
ported, hath entertained five thousand Almaines, which are 
looked for in Tuscana shortly, to what end is not yet 
known. 

The heats were so great in my passage from Naples to 
Sienna, as for my part I was never more gladder then when 
I was arrived there, where I mean to remain until the latter 



320 DEATH OF LORD ZOUCH. [JUNE, 

end of Auguste. And thus craving pardon, if I have waded 
any further than becomes me, for that the good meaning of 
men are to be considered, I humbly end. From Sienna, this 
15 of June, 1569. 

Yours moste assured, 

EDWARD WINDESOR. 



CECIL TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. * 

It may please your good Lordship, at this present I have 
no great matter, but partly to visit you with my letters, and 
to lett you know how by posting of a servant of my Lady 
Zouche's to me on Monday last, with knowledg of the Lord 
Zouch's death on Saturday, there chanced a tale to be mis- 
told to my Lord of Leicester at Westminster, that my Lord of 
Hunsdon's servant was come post with news of his lord and 
master's death, so that it was almost two dayes ere it could 
be righted and duly receaved what was trew. Even now in- 
dede we have knowledg of my Lord of Shrewsbury's dan- 
gerous relapse into his palsey, and with that in deliquio 
animi. God comfort hym ! 

From France we look certainly to heare of some battell, 
for so must the French King offer it to kepe asunder the 
Almayns and the Admiral, the Almayns beyng near Lymo- 
ges, at a town called Soubzterron, and the Admyral within 
four leagues of Lymoges, the King's camp at Burges in 
Berry. And thus I end with my humble commendations to 
my Lady. From Grenwych, the 22 of June, 1569. 
Your Lordship's at command, 

W. CECILL. 

* Who was at this time acting as Lord President of the North. 

' V 



15(>9.] IRELAND. REBELLION OF THE BUTLERS. 3*21 



THE EARL OF MURRAY TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My very good Lord, after may hertie commendations, 
having occasion to send halkis 1 to the court, I have thocht 
good to present your Lordship with a tarsell and a falcon, 
and hes commanded the berer to deliver the same be the 
way. Trusting your Lordship will accept them in good 
part, as of him quhom your Lordship may use and employ in 
anything I can in my power, quherof your Lordship sail 
have good proof quhensover it sail please you put me to charge. 
And thus leaving your Lordship further untroubled at this 
present, committing you to the tuition of God. At Sanct 
Andrew's, the 17th of August, 1569. 

Your Lordship's richt assured to his power, 

JAMES, Regent. 



CECIL TO NICHOLAS WHITE. 

Sir, this 7th of September your long letter of the first, and 
the less of the 3rd cam to me for many respects gratefully, 
first for the sender and the testimony of his good will, whereof I 
cannot dowt, because I measure it by mine own. The next 
was for signification of the Butlers stouping to the Erie their 
brother*, and "the good success of the Lord Deputy, of which 

1 Hawks 

* Under the year 1569, Camden tells us that " Edmund and 
Peter Boteler, the Earl of Ormond's brethren, who had injuri- 
ously opposed their neighbours in Munster, refused to obey the 
laws, prosecuting the good subjects with fire and sword, and en- 
tered into a confederacy with James fits-morris, of the house of 
Desmond, Macarti-More, fits-edmund senescall of Imokelly, and 
others, who, with the Bishop of Rome and the Spaniard, laboured all 
they could for maintenance of their religion, and to thrust Queen Eli- 
zabeth out of her kingdom of Ireland. Whereupon they were pro 
claimed traitors, and Sir Peter Carew, the elder, skirmished with them 
VOL. I. v 



322 STATE OF IRELA1S 7 D. [SEPT. 

two matters we all were made very do wtfull by letters from the 
counsell at Dublin of the 30th of August, who made all things 
allmost desperate ; first, that they could never heare from the 
Deputy, nor know nothing of his estate ; next that the But- 
lers increased their rebellion, and wold not cease upon the 
Erie's motions to them ; that the rebells in the north were 
coming to invade the English pale ; that the power of the 
pale was not able to withstande both the north and the But- 
lers ; but yet they wold attend to the north, and leave the 
Butlers ; with many such uncomfortable advertisements, wher- 
with we being here perplexed, your letters hath somewhat 
relieved us, and I hope hourly to heare from the Lord De- 
puty. 

I cannot presently with multitude of words express my 
good lykyng of your letters, by which I see as in a glass 
yourself represented as I take it, sick in body, and grieved in 
mynd, but whole in wisdom and constancy. Seeing Almighty 
God doth suffer you to be so sharpely touched as few other, 
you have the more cause to acknowledg his goodnes in giv- 
ing you a larger measure of constancy and pacience than of 
troubles. Although by your troubles you are made the 
poorer, yet you are not the less honest, but truly as well 
thought of here amongst us, as any of the contrey. Pluck up 
your heart, and be assured, your virtue may be pressed, it will 
not be oppressed. 

sundry times with variable fortune. Neverthelesse, having gathered 
together certaine companies of lewde people, they besieged Kilkenny, 
and commanded the citizens to deliver Warham Saint-Leger's wife 
into their hands. But being repulsed by the garrison soldiers, which 
sallied upon them, they pitifully spoyled the country round about. To 
kindle the flame of this rebellion, there came privily from the Spaniard, 
Juan Mendoza ; and out of England to quench it came the Earle of 
Ormond, who perswaded his brethren so as they submitted them- 
selves." 

At the same time, in the north, Turlogh Leinigh raised the standard 
of rebellion in Ulster, who was only hindered from becoming formida 
ble by the incursions of the Scottish islanders in his own country. 



1569.] NORFOLK AND MARY. 323 

I have been pressed with such kind offers of my Lord 
Deputy,* and with the like of my Lord of Leicester, as I have 
accorded with him upon articles by a manner of A. B. with- 
out any persons named, that if P. S. and A. C. hereafter shall 
like to marry, then shall H. S., the father of P. S., make as- 
surances, &c. ; and then also shall W. C., the father of A. C., 
paye, &c. If you speak to John Thomas, pray him to show 
them, f 

What may follow I know not, but as I wish P. S. full liberty, 
so surely A. C. shall have it, and in the meantime I will 
omit no point of friendship. 

You may hear plentifully of a marriadg intended with the 
Queen of Scots here with us, but howsoever you have it, I 
can assure you the Queue's Majesty at this present so mis- 
lykethit, as I know nobody dare deal therm. And the prin- 
cipall party J with us here, doth cease, having had a 
contentation therein, if the Queue's good will might be had, 
but not otherwise. 

In France the admiral's power exceeded the King's. He 
is sieging of Poyters, the winning or losing whereof will make 
an end of the cause. 

He is entered within the town by assault, but the Duke of 
Guise, &c. are entrenched in a stronger part of the town ; 
and without the King give a battle, it is thought he cannot 
escape from the Admiral. 

I send you a printed letter of truth. Fare you well, and 

* Sir Henry Sydney. 

t These initials are easily filled up by P[hilip] S[ydney], A[nn] 
C[ecil], H[enry] Sfydney], and W[illiam] C[ecil]. Sir Philip was 
nephew of the Earl of Leicester. 

J The Duke of Norfolk. 

It is generally considered as a question settled by Chalmers, that 
the first printed newspapers in England, were published at the period 
of the threatened invasion by the Spanish Armada in 1588, when the 
government issued "The English Mercuric, published by authority 
for prevention of false reports." This, however, appears to be one of 
the many cases where people have been led to fix erroneously the first 

Y 2 



324 NORFOLK AND MARY. [SEPT. 

by my next I will acquit your long letters with some further 
wryting. 

At Southampton, the 8th of Sept. 1569. 
Yours assuredly, 

W. CECILL. 

My Lord of Leicester is nearly recovered of an ague which 
held hym twelve dayes. 



JOHN FOX TO THE DUKE OF NORFOLK.* 

May it it please your Grace, ther is a great rumor with us 
here in London, and so far spread, that it is in every man's 

invention of a thing at a particular time, because they have not found 
earlier mention of it. The Mercury of 1588, was probably only the 
adoption by government of a practice which had already become ge- 
neral, and in this letter we have mention of a printed paper of news, 
almost twenty years earlier. It is curious enough that the primitive 
name of news-paper should have outlived all others. Under the title 
of Mercuries and Intelligencers they were multiplied exceedingly du- 
ring the Commonwealth. The Oxford Gazette, which four months af- 
terwards became the London Gazette, began in Nov. 1665. 

The term Gazette is said to be derived from the Italian gazetta, the 
name of a small piece of money, which was in Italy the established 
price of a letter of news written by the hand. The first known perio- 
dical published under this title, was one in France, by Theophraste 
Renaudot, in 1 631. 

* This letter was written to the Duke of Norfolk on the first rumours 
of his project of marriage with the Queen of Scots. There can now 
be little doubt, from a comparison of English and foreign documents 
relative to the history of this period, that the Duke of Norfolk had suf- 
fered himself to be drawn into an' extensive and formidable plot against 
his sovereign, in the event of its success, his reward to be the hand of 
Mary, who then would be Queen of England. From the great secrecy 
kept by everybody concerned in it, the Duke was not at this time sus- 
pected of any other designs but the simple marriage, which he had 
partly communicated in private to some of the nobles, and even to 
Cecil himself. 

When Elizabeth summoned him to court, he kept away under pre- 



1569.] NORFOLK AND MARY. 325 

inouth almost, of your marriage with the Scottish Queen, which 
minor as I trust to be false, so would I be sorry that it should 
be true, for two respects. The one, for the goodwill I bear 
to you, the other for the love I bear to the Commonwealth, 
for that I see no other, and many besides me, do so no less, 
but the day of that marriage, whenever it begins, will 
end with such a catastrophe as will be either ruinous to your- 
self, or dangerous to the tranquillity of the realm, the peace 
whereof standing so long amongst us through the great mercy 
of God, God forbid it should now begin to break by you. 
Your Grace knows what enemies we have, both within and 
without, against whom we have always trusted, and do yet 
trust, next under God and the Queen, to have you a sue 
Scipio unto us ; to the contrary whereof, these rumours cannot 
persuade me, but that as you have virtuously begun, so by 
the Lord's grace you will constantly continue still. How- 
ever, since the noise and clamour of the people makes me 
somewhat to muse, and because true love is always full of 
fear, I beseech you let me say to you what I think in this 
matter, that in case you take this way to marry with this lady 
in our Queue's days, it will in the end turn you to no great 
good. I beseech you, therefore, for God's sake, be circum- 
spect, and mark well what they be, that set you on this 
work, and whereunto they shoot. There is no greater cun- 
ning in these days, than to know whom a man may trust ; 
examples you have enough, within the compass of your own 

tenses, sometimes of illness, and at others of fear, until at last he 
obeyed the Queen's peremptory command, and was committed to the 
Tower early in October, where he remained till the August of the year 
following. 

John Fox was born in 1517, at Boston, in Lincolnshire, and was af- 
terwards fellow of Magdalene College, Oxford. During the reign of 
Queen Mary, he sought refuge at Basil from the persecution of his 
enemy, Bishop Gardiner. He had been tutor to the Duke of Norfolk 
who on his return after the accession of Elizabeth, patronised him du- 
ring his life, and at his death left him a pension. 



326 THE EARL OF SUSSEX. [SEPT. 

days, wherby you may learne, what noblemen have been cast 
away by them, whom they seemed most to trust. Remember 
I pray you the example of Mephibosheth, wherof I told you 

being yong ; howe first he was underfoote, then again* 

***** # 



THE EARL OF SUSSEX TO CECIL.f 

Sir, by your letters of the 6th of this present receyved yes- 
terdaye, I perceive you have heard that I have bene no small 
worker in the matter of the Scottishe Quene's marriage, and 
yet you assured yourself that my intent was honorable and 
loyal as you have found my Lord of Norfolk's to be, for he 
made you privy to the matter. And in th'end you require 
me ever to deale plainely with you, or not to deale at all ; 
but if I should varye with you, the hurte might me yours, but 
the dishonour should be myne. 

For your good opinion in regard of my intent I moste 
heartily thank you, and surely I will not gyve you cause to 
remove from it. 

My Lord of Norfolk, as I wrate in my former letters, sent 
me word by Cantrell (since niy going from Berwick) that 
th'erles of Arundell, Pembroke, and Leicester, had ernestly 
moved him to marrye the Scottish Quene, whereupon he re- 
quired my advise as a frend whom he trusted. Whereunto I 

* The MS. which is Fox's draught of the letter, ends thus abruptly. 

t " When now," says Camden, " the rumour of the marriage waxed 

more and more rife, new suspicions were gathered from all 

parts, and Cecil, who always attended most carefully to the safety of 
the Commonwealth and religion, bent his mind most diligently to sift 
out the matter. By his letters, therefore, he dealt with Sussex, Lord 
President of the North, who was most inward with the Duke, and most 
nearly tyed unto him in friendship, that if he understood anything of 
the Duke's marriage, he should advise the Queene thereof. What an- 
swer he made I know not" The letter here printed, which is quite 
characteristic of the high spirit of the Earl of Sussex, is that which 
escaped the researches of Camden. 



1569.] THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 327 

answered, that I would give no advise until I first knew 
how the Quene's Majestic liked of it, and thereupon I still 
depend. And if any person have at any time said otherwise 
of me, or that I knew thereof sooner, or know more than I 
write to you, or ever dealt further therein, I say in plain 
terms he has said untruly, and by this you may understand 
my works. 

I am glad you find my Lord of Norfolk's intent (for he 
made you privy to this matter) to be honourable and loyal, 
from which I trust he will not digress in this or any other 
matter. And truly I know no further of his intent than I 
have written. 

If the Queue's Majestic had in time married with the 
Archduke Charles, which you write she now utters her 
disposition, it had been the best way for her surety, but 
that matter hath been so handled, as on the one side it is 
desperate that her Majesty will bone fide intend to marry e, 
and on the other side, dowtefull whether upon the hard 
dealings paste that some may be induced to any further talk, 
wherein God work in her heart to do that may be most for 
her honour and surety. 

I have written plainly, I do write plainly, and I will 
write plainly to you, for as by my dealing with you, you 
shall take no hurt, nor I dishonour, and truly I will not 
varye from my writings, for with my prince and my friend I 
deal bone fide, and know no cunning nor will learn none, 
and thereof you may be entirely assured, and the like where- 
of I do assure myself I may from you. 

My conscience shall be at God's direction, my heart and 
hand at the Queue's commandment, and all that with duty 
and honesty I may do at my friends devotion. And so I end, 
and wish to you as to myself. 

From Cawood,* llth September, 1569. 

Yours assuredly, 

T. SUSSEX. 

* A town about ten miles from York. 



328 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 



SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

It may please your Honor to be advertised, that accord- 
ing unto her Majestie's commandment, I am come hither, 
fynding already in this tyme a great change amongest our 
neighbours in Scotland, the same being cheefely growen by 
having bene assured by certain of theyre Quene's returne and 
restorement to her former dignities, which dayly they have 
expected, which nowe they are in lesse hope of, and thereby, 
lyke themselves, begyn a little to slack in the wynde and staye 
theyre former course. 

There is some drynes grown of Grange's parte towards the 
Regente, which Ledingeton dothe no what seeke to lett. 1 
At the Regente's laste being in Edenborough, Grange refused 
to come out of the castell unto hym, for that th'earle Morton 
was in his company, who receaves now at Dawkethe, 2 muchc 
hated of all Ledingeton's faction. The Regente's comyng to 
the borders was not now looked for, and with so small a 
number the Lord Hume hathe receyved hym in to Hume castle, 
and hathe ben often with hym at Kelssye ; but one howse 
wyll not hold them twayne if Morton be thirde person. There 
hathe of late bene dy vers letters sent into England, and from 
thence into Scotland. There is now stayed and is here one 
of their carriers, Dan Carre, of Scheyldstoke Brayes, who 
was one of them here in the boundes at the kylling of the 
skowte, at my Lord's first entrye into thys charge. He hath 
bene from his youthe a thiefe and a murderer, and these three 
yeres paste an owtelaw. 

Either his staye here, or his delyverie unto the Regente to 
answer the evills he hathe done unto England, wold well 
contente the true borderers of bothe the realmes. 

There was a meane devised to have caught all the Humes, 
but the same is broken. The fyre that is kindled betweene 

' Hinder, abate. 2 Dalkeith. 



1569.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 329 

the Earl Morton and the Lord of Ledingeton and theirs, 
will not without blood be quenched ; neither party will 
refuse any friend to take part. 

The Earl of Cassells hath been with the Regente at Kills 
sye. The gentlemen of the marches are divided, so have 
they been and will be continued upon a small occasion. 

I have already had with me messengers from either sides, 
as also from the neuters, to have conference with me, which 
yet I have refused, alleging busynes. 

This berer Capteii Jacksley, my friend and ally, and of 
long continuance in service, being of my Lord Governor well 
favoured, and now for his good taken up by his Lordship to 
the court, for the obtaining of some little suit he has to 
the Queue's Majestic, I am humbly to desire your Honor's 
furtherance therein, and so with my duty I pray God ever to 
preserve you. 

From Barwyke, the 30th of September, 1569. 
Your Honor's ever assuredly at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

It may please your Honour to be advertised, that this day 
the Abbot of Dumfermylyne with eight persons in his com- 
pany, from Kelssye, where the Regente is, doth take his 
journey by post through the myddell marches towards the 
court, with answer to such heads as were propounded at 
their convention. The Lord of Grange is now by consent 
Provost of Edenborough, and is now looked for at Kelssye; 
and the Regente assures himself of him as much as he hands 
before. 

Dumb ailen was promised to be relieved the 15th of the 
last, by their Queen, whose coming shortly into Scotland 
is of some looked for. And so for this present I commit 



330 THE BISHOP OF ROSS. [OCT. 

your Honor to God's tuition, looking for answer as well for 
the soldiers that the Regente desyres to accompany hym to 
Lyddysdale, as what shall be done with Dan Carre of Shyl- 
toke Brayes, who hathe many wayes injured and harmed 
England. 
From Barwyke, this 4th of October, 1569. 

Your Honor's humble assured at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO CECIL. 

Sir, I thanke you that ye are desirous to heare of my 
healthe. I thank Godde I am well pro meo more, and my 
howseholde is also well. I have not written to you of late, 
because I wolde not trouble you, being otherwise occupied in 
affayres of greatest importance. 

I and such other poore men pray daylie unto Godde, that 
he maye give unto you, my Lords, and you of the counsel!, 
the spirit of wisdome and fortitude, that you may bene ex- 
plicare consilia for the Queue's Majestie's safetie and suretie. 

Yesternighte I received a letter from London, wherin wer 
written these wordes following : 

" The Bishop of Rosse * ministered this daye in Pawle's 
churche, in a gowne of damaske, with a greate rowte abowt 
him, and attending upon him, as it wer to be seen and known 
to the worlde," &c. &c. What may be gathered of suche 
doings I referre to your judgement. 

I have done for the Chancellor of Peterborowe as you 
wished me. I praye you helpe to gett me discharged of myne 
Irishe gueste, whose petition I sende you herewith. In myne 
opinion (under your correction) it wer good he wer sente by 

* The famous John Lesley, bishop of Ross, one of the most intrigu- 
ing personages of his time. He had long acted as Mary's ambassador, 
and was busy in all the plots against Elizabeth and the Protestants. 



1569.] THE REBELLION IN THE NORTH. 331 

pursyvante at his charge to my Lord Deputy, there to be 
ordered as you shall be sent instructions, or as my Lord 
Deputy and the Lord Chancellor and Bishops of the counsel 
there shall think requisite. Cypriane would have things 
ordered in the countries where the faults be committed. 

God keep you ! From my house at Fulham, 22 October, 
1569. 

Yours in Christ, 

EDM. LONDON. 



SIR GEORGE BOWS TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX.* 
The doings of th'Erles of Westmoreland and Northumber- 

* On the arrest of the Duke of Norfolk, many who were partakers in 
the same plot, were seized with dismay. The Earls of Northumber- 
land and Westmoreland were to raise the north country, the strong 
hold of the English Catholics, in the spring, and were to be joined by 
a body of Spaniards to be sent over by the Duke of Alva ; and already 
Vitelli, Marks of Catena, was arrived in London under cover of an 
embassy, but in truth to take the command of the Spanish forces on 
their landing. The Queen, ignorant of these designs, summoned the 
two Earls to court, who, conscience stricken, and not daring to obey 
her commands, entered prematurely into action. On the 15th of No 
vember, they raised their standard at Brankspeth, the splendid seat 
of the Earl of Westmoreland. The next day they marched to Durham, 
where they tore the service books in the minster, and returned the 
same day to Brankspeth. The next day they were at Darlington ; 
from the 18th to the 20th, the Earl of Northumberland was success 
civilly at Richmond, North-Allerton, and Boroughbridge ; and on this 
latter day the two Earls, with the Countess of Northumberland, cole 
braced mass at Rippon. They went thence by Boroughbridge and 
Wetherby towards Tadcaster. On Tuesday, the 22nd of November, 
they mustered on Clifford Moor to the number of sixteen hundred 
horsemen and four thousand footmen. In the mean time, Sir George 
Bows, who had thrown himself into Barnard Castle, was mustering 
in their rear in the bishopric, and Sir John Forster as well as Sir Henry 
Percy, the brother of the Duke of Northumberland, were collecting 
forces for the Queen on the borders. After the muster on Clifford 



332 THE EARLS AT DURHAM. [NOV. 

land : yesterdaye, at four of the clock in the afternoone, the 
sayd Erles accompanyed with Richard Norton*, Francys his 
sone, with dyvers others of hys sayd sones, Christopher Nevyll, 
Robert Nevyll, brother to the sayd Erie of Westmoreland, and 
these . . . wythe others to the nomber of three hundred horse- 
men, armed in corsetts, and ... of plate, with speres, har- 
quebusses, and daggers, came to Durham, and entered the 
mynster there, and there toke all the bokes but one, and they 
there the communion table defaced, rent, and broke in pieces, 
and after read a proclamation in the Quene's name that no 
man before their pleasures knowen use any service, and call- 
ing the citizens before them, tolde them they had done 
nothing, but that they wold allowe and was after the 
Queene's proceedings, and so tarying about the space of an 
hower, they departed, putting a watch of twenty-three towns- 
men to the towne, which tooke a servant of myne which I 

Moor, the Earls, instead of following up their intention of marching 
on York, where the Earl of Sussex lay, returned hastily by Wetherby, 
Northallerton, and Richmond, to besiege Barnard Castle, which Sir 
George Bowes held gallantly against them for eleven days, and then 
marched out with the honours of war, and joined the Earl of Sussex. 
In the mean time, Sir John Forster and Sir Henry Percy, marching 
against the Earl of Westmoreland, who lay at Durham, "did give to 
the said Earle a great skirmish." On the llth of December, the Earl 
of Sussex, with his forces, marched from York towards Topcliffe, and 
as they advanced the rebels retired from Durham to Hexam, in Nor- 
thumberland, from whence, as the Queen's troops advanced, they con- 
tinued their retreat into Cumberland, where, deserted by their leaders 
and principals, who fled into Scotland, they dispersed, every man to 
save himself as he could. Such is the account of this rising given by 
the chronicler, John Stowe. 

t Old Richard Norton, of Norton Conyers, who married Susan, 
daughter of Richard Nevill, Lord Latimer. He had a very large family, 
and is said to have led all his nine sons to join the insurgents. Stowe 
says, that he had the honour to bear before the rebel army, " a crosse 
with a banner of the five wounds." When the Earls fted, Richard 
Norton accompanied them into Scotland, and escaped with the Earl 
of Westmoreland, c. into Flanders. 



1569.] THE EARLS MAKE THEIR PROCLAMATION. 333 

sent thither, and him carried to his lodgings, and there he 
was kept till this morning, and so came away. 

In haste, at Barnard Castle,* the 10th of November, at 
12 oftheclocke, 1569. 

Your Lordship's wholly at commandment, 

GEORGE BOWS. 



SIR GEORGE BOWS TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My bounden duty premised, pleases your Lordship to be 
advertised, the two Earls yesterday passed to Richmond, 
and there made proclamation which, because of the difference 
of reports in some parts, I omit to advertise, and the rest was 
that where there was certain councelers cropen 1 in about the 
Prince which had excluded the nobility from the Prince, and 
had set such law contrary to the honour of God and the welthe 
of the realm, which they meant to reform, whereupon 
they had assembled themselves trusting that the people would 
take their part, which they required, and then they doubted 
not but they should restore the ancient laws, as mass and 
other things now laid away. And at Darneton 2 was made 
the like proclamation, where they offer great wages to such as 
will serve them, and has not only stayed the people in 
many parts of Richmondshire for assembling to me and the 
commissioners hither, but has in the Bishopric called all 
the people at Darneton together, and this day theie make 
their musters there, and appoint captains to such number of 
fotemen as they have levied. 

They have constrained by force sundry to follow them, 
as the people of Bishopton, tenants to John Conyers, my 
son-in-law, being ready to come forwards to serve the 

* Barnard Castle belonged to the Earl of Westmoreland. It is at 
a very short distance from Streatham Castle, the seat of Sir George 
Bows. 

1 Crept. 2 Darlington. 



334 PROGRESS OF THE REBELLION. , [NOV. 

Queue's Majestic under him here. They not only forced them 
to go with them, but compelled the rest of the towne, armed 
and unarmed, to go to Darneton, and hourely advertisements 
cometh of their constraining men to serve them ; and the 
feare is so increased that in a manner no man dare travaile. 
Yet, for any thing I can learne, the whole people of Rich- 
mondshire meaneth to be dutifull, but dare not assemble to 
wards us for feare of intercepting, as one towards me is in- 
tercepted, and yet not hurte, but knowing a servant to a 
gentleman, tenant of myne, no we sicke, they have commanded 
him to warn his master upon payne of spoyle that to-morrowe 
he be with them at Allerton. And so nowe they occupie 
much of the bottome of the countrie, and for all that they 
exceeded not yesterday four hundred horsemen and five 
hundred fotemen, the more parte of which fotemen are clearly 
unarmed. 

Christopher Nevell* is gone into Kirkbymoreside to raise 
people, and cometh thence into Cleaveland. The matter 
groweth verie hote, and sure in my opinion requireth to be 
expedited, lest what with feare or faire speche or money they 
drawe awaye the hearts of people. And sure besydes my 
owne and these appertaining, such my friends as will with 
me aventure all, there is not here as yet above seventy men, 
and manye of them not of the best furnished. 

Yesterday, Francis Norton,t with the number of a hundred 

* Christopher Nevill, of Hippeswell, Yorkshire, who was uncle of 
the Earl of Westmoreland. 

f Francis Norton was the eldest son of Richard Norton, of Norton 
Conyers. In the old ballad of the Rising of the North, printed in 
Percy's Reliques, he is represented as going unwillingly with his 
father. When the eight younger answered readily to his call, Old 
Richard is represented as addressing his eldest son, 

" But what say'st thou, O Francis Norton ? 

Thou art mine eldest sonn and heire : 
Somewhat lyes brooding in thy breast ; 
Whatever it be, to me declare. 



1569.] THE EARLS RECRUIT BY FORCE. 385 

horsemen, has entered John Saire's house at Worsall, and 
therein taken his soon and some portion of armour which is not 
great, but much discomforted him for his son. The 
armour is six corsletts, two or three harquebusses, and six 
marryons, which he weighs not. 

This day young Nicholas Fairfax,* with great company, 
has entered the hows of Anthony Kattericke, and taken 
therein his two sonnes-in-law Lambert and Mennell, which 
Mennell was but gone thither, meaning of the morrow to 
come hither, and is a servant of th'Erle of Leicester's. 

They sought for my children where they were at school,but 
yesterday I brought them hither. But in the towns in 
manner every where they take away the people, and we come 
too late with our commandments, which yet we proceed 
with and shall the best I may, having many things to deal 
in, both for fear of the worst, and comforting the fearful, 
faint, or false. I doubt to get any more advertisements, but 
wish that speed be made, and promises dutiful obedience 
and diligence to the full of my wits and power, and will and 
shall end with a dutiful and obedient heart, yielding my 

Father, you are an aged man, 

Your head is white, your beard is grey ; 

It were a shame at these your years 
For you to rise in such a fray. 

Now, fie upon thee ! coward Francis, 

Thou never learned this of me : 
When thou were young and tender of age, 

Why did I make so much of thee ? 

But, father, I will wend with you, 

Unarmed and naked will I bee ; 
And he that strikes against the crown, 

Ever an ill death may he dee !" 

This Francis Norton seems on some account to have received favour, 
for he saved some part of the family estates. 

* The son of Sir Nicholas Fairfax, who went with the Earl of Nor 
thumberland to wait on the Queen of Scots at Carlisle. See before, 
p. 273. 



336 THE EARLS AT RICHMOND. [NOV.. 

breathe in truthe to every authoritie, and thus commending 
my service to your Lordship's directions, promising to pre- 
serve the people committed under my charge withowte any 
attempte but in defence, I humblye take my leave in haiste.* 
At Barnard Castell, the 17th of November, 1569, at nine 
of the clocke. 

They this daye at Richmond made a great muster, but what 
is further done I am not yet advertised. 

They use the Queue's Majestie's name in their calls, with 
threatning to burne such as absent themselves. 

The Earle of Northumberland beareth a guyde before his 
troops. 

Masse was yesterdaye at Darneton, and J ohn Swynbume,f 
with a staffe, drove before him the poor folks to hasten them 
to heare the same. 

After the writing hereof, two of the most substantiallest men 
of the towne of Richmond did come unto us, and declared the 
commandements that the Erie of Northumberland had given 
them, and how he had required first by fair speech and 
after by offers of money, and lastly by threats of burning and 
spoyling, that they sholde give hym ayde of an hundred men, 
but they wolde not confesse to graunt anye ; lastly they had 
a daye given to make answer to of the mcrowe, at which tyme 
they were newely provoked, and practises made to bring them 
to it, but they still refused. Then it was tolde them that the 
moste parte of the gentlemen with me was escaped hence, and 
was corned to them ; but fynally, after many speeches, it was 
requyred that they wold conduct him, being not above sixty 
persons, to the other Erie to Allerton, whereunto they were 
content to bring him to the bounds of theire towne, but not 
further, whereupon he wold have them armed and desyred 
but one hundred, but they saide they wold all go, but un- 
armed. Whereupon they went indede to the nomber of three 

* Sir George wrote the former letter in such haste that he directed 
it to the " Earl of Westmoreland/' instead of the "Earl of Sussex." 
t John Swinburne, of Chopwell, Durham. He was attainted. 



1569,.] THE REBELS THREATEN YORK. 337 

hundred men of all sorts, and at the limits of their bounds 
they wold have departed, but there they were newly set on 
again, but it could not prevail, and so they departed, and 
in going away, sundry of the Earle's servants offred to take 
some steal caps and bills from them, but they willed 
them to staye, or they should win them with strypes. 
Whereupon they all returned home. Yet the Erie at their 
parting said that if they sent him not one hundred men to- 
morrow to Benning, or at least furthest that night to Ryp- 
upon, he in his return wold burn and spoil the town. 

They have now by these men promised dutiful obedience, 
and promised to notify th'effecte of the commission de- 
levered me this day, dated yesterday, which satisfies much 
people, which I earnestly seek therefore to get known every 
where, and order is now given for the same. 

Th'Erles seem they will lye this night at Allerton, and to- 
morrow night at Byppon, but my intelligence saith, whereof 
there is also great lykelyhode, that they will this night to 
Ryppon, where they are in great hope much to be increased, 
and says further that they will either attempt you at York, 
if they like their force, or else draw towards Lankeshire. 
But good my lord, look to your own safety, for therein 
lies all the hope of good speed of the whole affairs, and 
for advertisements I must now cease, for that they are drawn 
far from me. Sir John Nevell* hath promised to meet 
them at Ryppon, and they want much of others also, but they 
will staye. 

Much of small occasion sure their threats be great towards 
me, promising upon their return to assault me; but I 
trust by Godde's help the old adage in them shall 
be verified, "God sends an evil willed cow short horns." 
Fynally, for truth, this day at noon they no way, being 
altogether told, make five hundred horsemen and five hun- 
dred foteman, as before for the most part being without 

* Sir John Nevil, of Liversedge. He escaped along with the Earls 
into Scotland. 

VOL. I. Z 



338 THE EARLS RETIRE FROM TADCASTER. [DEC. 

armor or weapon, but we doubt they wyll nowe grow greate 
of these simple people, rather shapes then matter. But now to 
complaine our lacke, which is armor and weapon and monye, 
for the contrye of Yorkshire never goeth to warre but for 
wages. 

The people already complayneth, and yet have I bestowed 
that littell I had amongst them, and hathe prepared such store 
ofvyttallthat they shall not lacke, which hathe and dothe 
bothe please and content them well, but wold to G od I had 
your Lordship's warrant to the Queue's Majestie's armourer 
at Newcastell, for I wold make a convey in their absence to 
fett some, for that indede is our greateste lacke. And thus 
agayne I end, wishing againe that your Lordship take good 
heede to yourself. From Barnard Castell, the 17th of No- 
vember, at twelve of the clocke at night, 1569. 

Your Lordship's wholy at command, 

GEORGE BOWES. 



THOMAS STANHOPE TO . 

It may please your Honors to be advertised, that this first 
of December being in the morning, after we addressed our 
last letters to your Lordships, came to us Mr. Remold Lee, 
whom we dispatched to Shirbourne, as we first wrote we had 
done one, having bestowed his travail to this presente to the 
effecte following : first, that he had learned that the rebells 
were departed from Tadcaster* towardes Richmond on Satur- 
daye last, spoiling Richmond at their coming upon color 
that they wolde not sende them such men and ayde as they 
sent for ; thence they passed towardes Brawnsbye, spoiling 
all places in their way of cattell and horses, and what els 
they could come by. And so did they in the Lord Lati- 

* Tadcaster was the most southern point to which the rebels ad- 
vanced. 



1569.] MISTRUST AMONG THE REBELS. 339 

mar's,* Lord Evers', and Sir William Bellewes' livings, as Sir 
William Bellows reported to him at York. At Caterley More 
these rebels mustered their men on Monday, where it was 
credibly reported to him that they were not above four 
thousand footmen at the most ; the most part whereof 
rude, unarmed, and ill appointed ; and are eight hundred 
horsemen, or under a thousand. They discharged the most of 
their footmen to be ready at an hower's call, but thought by 
Sir Raffe Sadler'sf report unto him that they would not be 
gathered together again in haste, insomuch that he hoped 
that our men which were to set forwards should have little 
to do. 

Moreover, by report of a credible man dwelling by him in 
Shirbourne, who was stayed in the rebell's camp, he heard 
that the common persons had conceived a mistrust towards 
the Earls that they would steal away from them beyond the 
seas, or out of the land, and leave them in the briers. Other 
intelligence he could not get, because the rebels were de- 
parted before he came to Shirbourne. As knows the Lord, 
who preserve your Honours long to his pleasure. From 
Newark, the first of December, 1569. 

Your Honors' humble to command, 

THOMAS STANHOPE. 



SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

May it please your Honour to be advertised, eighteen days 
passed I sent Mr. Heryngton unto you with the report of 
the estate both of town and country now under my rule 
and charge, as also my knowledge of the proceedings in 
Scotland. He was present at Edenbourge at the great 

* Sir John Nevill, Baron Latimer of Danby ; William, second Baron 
Evers of Wilton; Sir William Belasyse. 

t Sir Ralph Sadler was paymaster of the army employed against the 
rebels. 

z 2 



340 MURRAY OFFERS AID TO ELIZABETH. [DEC. 

assemblie. I directed liym to repaire in passing to my Lord 
Levetenante, and to acquaint his Lordship with the estate 
here. I heare he is now by hym stayd, and to be employed 
with some charge. 

Amongest the rest he had to declare unto your Honor the 
Regente's offer, readynes with all that in Scotland would do 
for hym, was at the Queue's Majestic my soveraigne's com- 
mandment, and if it shold please her Highnes to have hym 
with ten thousand with hym for twenty dayes, he wolde 
bring them without any charge unto her. He hathe also in 
every good town caused proclamation to be made, forbidding 
all men to ayde or assiste by any meanes any of the rebells 
uponpayne of treason. He also hathe written his private 
letters to divers upon the borders, as to the Lord Hume and 
others, to the lyke effect. And he holds hys frends in a redy- 
nes upon the fyrste knowledge from her Majestie to sette 
forthe forward, and remaynes in Edenbourge to the same 
end. 

Th'Earle Morton, bothe by his letters and messengers, offers 
himselfe to come with three thousand with hym, well ap- 
pointed. Dumlaneryke, Johnstons, Bowklwe, Wetherburne, 
Blaketter, and others, hathe offered hym so many, and re- 
mayne also preste 1 for the firste call. 

Sythense the departure of Mr. Heryngton, I signified unto 
your Honor of a new desyre of Ledyngton's to receive the 
whole nobility of Skotteland together, and they to bynd 
themselves by oathe and wrytings all to joyne and take parte 
together against all the Papistes of England and Scotland, and 
thys shoulde be moved by the minister unto the Regente. 
And the rather to have it take effecte, th'Earle Morton's in- 
clynation unto the same was required, with some other whom 
he hated as well. But it is not yet harkened unto, but kepte 
secret. Greate is the fear he is in, and latterlie, sithense his 
frendes departed of the towne of Edenborough, and looks 

1 Ready. 



156*9.] STATE OF SCOTLAND. 341 

still to th'Erle of Anguise. The writing whereunto his hand 
was, as they say, which would have found him faulty, is 
turned into ashes. But there is divers has seen it, whose 
testimony at the bar will as well for his condemnation 
serve. The Regente doth staye him to see how these 
troubles will end, and as it is thought to have farther and 
more matter against him, as to be a dealer to move both in 
England and Scotland increase of more troubles. He doth 
still write into England. The Bishop of Rosse hears 
often from him, and sends again. 

The Bishop of Rosse hath agreed with that ambassador 
there for Spain to send men from the Duke of Alva to land 
at Dombarton, eight hundred soldiers should be named to 
come. But if they come not presently, I think if they land 
there they will find another welcome then looked for For 
the Master of Greyme, who is a dealer with the Lord Fleminge 
for rendering of that, has brought word that if he may 
recover again such an abbay which is taken from him, he 
will deliver it. The Master is again gone thither, so that 
surely I think it will be rendered. 

The Lord of Grange is sound and sure unto the Regente, 
wherein divers in Scotland are deceived and offended. The 
Lord Seton, for saving of his sureties from forfyte of their 
bonds, is entered again into the castle of Edenborough, 
prisoner. He minded to pass into France, but now his 
next journey is like to be to Blackness. 

Th'Erle of Hunteley seeks leave to pass into France, 
which will not be granted. 

Th'Erle of Argyle makes once again a new reconciliation 
unto the Regente, which he will as well keep as the rest he 
has done before. 

The day of the great assembly in Edenborough, Grange 
early in the morning came to the Regente. 

Sir, I know your Grace has divers tales and brutes 
brought you of me ; to show how I am towards you, here be 



342 THE BORDERERS AID THE REBELS. [DEC. 

the keyes of the castle, place or displace there whom you 
please. 

And for any thing that I can understand, if Grange could 
have been wonne from the Regente, both he and Morton 
should have bene now lifeles, or ells other would have wanted 
their wills. I know the Lord Hume's mynd therm, who now, 
with Sir Andrew Karre, (altho they are greate enemyes,) 
the Lord of Farnyhyrste, and some of the surnames of Tyvy- 
dale and Lydesdale, have conference with the Queue's Ma- 
jestie my soveraigne's rebells, and I am not ignorante 
what determynation some have made to spoyl in the Easte 
Marches, and if there be any helpe of the rebells' evill doings, 
as that they may but stand, they mynde by open forrage, 
spoyles, and raising of fyre, to be doing. I have warned 
them within my charge to their strength to stand upon theyr 
gardes. But I wyshe your Honor understoode our estates, 
as well in towne as countrie. 

Mr. James Banfoure is delivered from Sainte Andrews, 
and at lybertie in Edenborogh. 

Th'Earle Morton's strength increaseth muche by the be- 
stowing in marriage th'Erle of Angushe's sisters. The 
Lord Maxwell is now to marry one of them. There is a 
couple come oute of Ireland, and were there a eight dayes 
sithense. They say, Sir E dmond Butler is broken o wte of De- 
velyne castell and escaped. The Deputie was at the nurye, (?) 
and that there was great appearances of more trouble to grow. 
For that they came so late from thense, 1 am the bolder to 
signifie the same. 

If the occasions grow not from other countreys, the Re- 
gente is nowe lykely to governe with quietnes, and assuredly, 
for as muche as I can gather, he is wholly at the Quene's 
Majestic my soveraigne's devotion. 

It is thoughte Mr. Banfoure shal be one of the accusers of 
Lydington. The Lord Hume styll puttes in store of victualles 
into Hume and Fawse C as tells, and lyes and so myndes all 



1569.] THE REBELS DISPERSE. 343 

this winter to remain in Fawse Castle, whereunto he has 
received in a store of fuel, which heretofore was wont to be 
stowed without. 

It is thought if Lydingeton could escape out of prison 
he wold receive him, and that if any of the rebels come 
unto him they shall have harbour, notwithstanding the Re- 
gente's letter unto him to the contrary. I know his answer 
at the receipt thereof. Lydyngton's friends are not suffered 
to come to him as was accustomed. And so leaving to 
trouble your Honour further, I humbly take my leave, praying 
God long to keep you. 

From Barwyke, the 9th of December, 1569. 

Your Honor's humble assured at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



VALENTINE BROWNE* TO LORD HUNSDON. 

We are presently advertised severally, that the rebels at 
one of the clock this present day have given warning to the 
common people to make shift for themselves, and thereupon 
have themselves departed in a great number of horsemen 
westward, as is reported. Of which matter I thought con- 
venient to advertise your Honour by this special messenger, 
who can declare in what forwardness we were this present 
towards Durham, to have been as nigh as we might possible 
to you. And thus I betake your Honour to the tuition of the 
Almighty. Written in haste upon our march, this llth. 
at night, the 16th of December, 1569. 

Your Lordship's humble to command, 

VALENTINE BROWNE. 

What shall be your pleasure we now do, I pray your 
Lordship advertise us by this bearer. 

* Valentine Browne was knighted in 1570, by Sussex, on his return 
from an inroad among the borderers. 
1 Deliver. 



344 MURRAY REPAIRS TO THE BORDER. [DEC. 

SIR WILLIAM DRURY TO CECIL. 

It maye please your Honor to be advertised, I have sythens 
my last of the 19th and 20th, directed unto you, receyved 
information from the Regente for his repayer unto the bor- 
ders * to meete with the rebells, and to impeach theyr entrye 
into Scotlande. In all so may his power, I thynke, wil be 
towardes five thousand now presently, and more are to come. 
He myndeth well to fight with them, if occasion may so 
serve. 

At theyr being at Exam, 1 they expected the comyng unto 
them of some, that I hope love themselves better, and dothe 
more consyder of their duties. As I can gather, they mynded 
if otherwayes they had not ben hyndered, to have deferred this 
theyr unhappy and undutifull enterprise till nearer unto the 
springe. The stranger loves not to come upon this coaste in 
the wynter. 

The Byshoppe of Rosse, I take it, be not ignorante of this 
commotion. There is one of Tadcaster, whose name is 
Taylor ; he is as it were a piece of lawyer ; he is one of his 
messengers, and was acquaynted with these matters before 
they brake thus farre owte. 

Yonge Gray, the schoolmaster's sone of Nuecastle, is 
another, for whom I have layd some baytes, besydes the ad- 
vertising of the Lord Lyvetenant and my Lord President. 
He passed now laste into Scotlande by the weste borders, 
new come from London. He brought letters to Duke Amble- 
ton, Ledyngton, from Harrys, Farnihirste, and others. 
Anthony Rokeby, I feare> had some foreknowledge of this 
undutifull parte. Hereafter I think your Honor shall from 
me heare of others. I can but wyshe the Byshopp of Rosse 
had not come in England, or that he had not received suche 

* When the Regent learnt that the English rebels were retreating 
towards the border, he marched thither with an army to hinder their 
reception in Scotland in a body. The names in this letter are in 
cypher. 1 Hexam. 



1569.] THE EARLS FLY INTO SCOTLAND. -Mo 

creditt. Ledington is of the mind that further troubles are 
yet to grow ; he is of the practise. In my last I signified 
what I gathered wold become of him. I think he hath done 
much harm. 

I cause both soldiers and townsmen, for that our number 
bers are not many, to work, and no charge unto her Majestic. 
Every man has his turn. The weather is cold and we have 
no money to buy coals. We sink the dyke lower; we 
make a wawmure (?) around abouts, and fyle and steppes. 
Gaffes and Lowe determine to discharge every duty unto 
the Queue's Majestic, my sovereign, to the spending of their 
lives, what word or necessity soever shall come. I doubt 
not but your Honour considers of Hartelpoll, some con- 
venyent number, with a trusty and sufficient leader. This I 
deliver under your Honor's correction, and so my trust is it 
shall be received. For any thing that I can get, the rebels 
will to Kokermouthe, if they cannot to Dumbarton. 

I think the passage at Glasgow and other places the Re- 
gent will cause guarded. And so far for this present ; I will 
not trouble your Honour farther, but humbly take my leave, 
praying God to keep you. 

From Barwyke, this 23rd of December, 1569. 

Your Honor's assured ever at commandment, 

WILLIAM DRURY. 



SIR HENRY RATCLIFFE * TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

This day there came your Lordship's letter of the flying of 
the two Earls and their company into Scotland, who I wysh 
were taken, to bind over farther quiet. I do not know 
whether your Lordship have received my letters of the 12th 
of this present, for that I have not heard from you since 
your letter of the third, with the postscript of the 6th. And it 

* The brother of the Earl of Sussex. 



346 SUSSEX ILL REPORTED AT COURT. [DEC. 

may so happen as being in the fielde you cannot understande 
my letters. You know my meaning therein. Wherefore I 
praye you by your next despatch let me heare from you, 
therfore if you do not understand me, I will write otherwise. 
I am gladd to heare the travaill your Lordship endureth as 
well of body as mynde. 

The envyed man oftentymes hathe not the worst happe, 
no more have you.* I do not dowte but as you have wisely 
attempted the beginning, so you will carefully foresee and 
prevent the eride. I praye your Lordship forgett not to 
wryte as often as any occasion serveth, and in any wise daily, 
and that to be sent with spede, lest others seeke therby to 
weare that you wynne, and enjoy e that you and yours shoulde 
possess. I wolde wryte more at large, but that the haste is 
such, as by long tarrying my letter shoulde be lefte out of the 
packet. We have every daye severall newes r and sometyme 
contraryes, and yet all put out as true.f I humbly take my 

* Whilst the Earl of Sussex was engaged in suppressing the re- 
bellion in the North, his enemies at court were busy spreading re- 
ports and insinuations against his fidelity, and his position was the 
more delicate, as one of his brothers, Egremond Ratcliffe, was amongst 
the rebels. To counterbalance the ill effect of these reports, Sir 
Ralph Sadler wrote from time to time warm letters in praise of the 
Earl's faithfulness and zeal. To one of them Cecil, on the 25th of 
December, answers, " In my opinion, more cannot be done than is by 
my Lord of Sussex, who hath here hard constructors, and therefore his 
Lordship is beholding to your testimony, wherin surely you do ho- 
nourably for mayntenance of truth, which 1 always have found in 
him, and beside that surely I think without prejudice of any of the 
nobilitie, 1 know none endowed with better parts for a nobleman and 
a paire of the realme than he is, God assisting him with his grace to 
employ it. My knowledg of his worthines only maketh me affec- 
tionated to him, and certenly nothing els." Sadler Paper. It would 
seem from this letter, and a former (p. 65.) that the Earl was some- 
what dilatory in sending intelligence of his motions to the court. 

t Thomas Norton, of Sharpenhoe, in Bedfordshire, a zealous wri- 
ter against the Papists and the Northern rebels, in his "Warning 
against the dangerous practices of the Papists, and specially the 



1569.] LONDON NEWSMONGERS IN 1570. 347 

leave, praying your Lordship not to forget my former re- 
quest of your receiving and understanding my letter from the 
Court at Wyndesor. This Saint Steven's day, at ten of 
the clock at night, 26th of December, 1569, in haste. 
Your Lordship's assured brother, 

HENRY RADECLYFFE. 

partners of the late rebellion," (Land. 1570,) gives us a curious 
account of the diligence of the disaffected in spreading rumours 
and news : " Another knot of such good company be common 
rumor-spreders, of whom the public fame is that there be or have 
been certain notable and noted walkers in Paule's and such places 
of resort, so common that the very usual places of their being 
there are ordinarily known by the name of Papists' corner, and Liar's 
bench, saving that I hear say now of late many of them flock more 
into the middle isle, which is supposed to be done partly to shun 
public noting, partly for better barkening, and partly for more com- 
modious publishing. The suspicion, grudge and talk goes among 
the Quene's good subjects, how such fellows be the coyners of 
news ; in the beginning of the rebellion how lusty they were, how 
their countenances, their flooring, their flinging paces, their whisper 
ings, showed their hearts ; how they had news of every increase, of 
every going forward, and every avantageable doing of the rebels ; 
how they have news out of France and Flaunders with the soonest, 
God knows what they send thither, and with what reciprocation 
they requite such news again ; how they had news of the late 
horrible murder ere it were done, as if they had ben accessories before 
the fact ; how they write letters at home directed to themselves ; how 
with these pretty letters, while they be fresh bleeding, that is, so scarcely 
dry that the ink blotteth, with their great countenances, and their 
wondrous intelligence and great insights in secrets of princes, as if 
they were kinges' cousins, and with their oifrings of wagers, and 
such other braggeries, they deface (as men say) all that can be 
brought or reported never so truly of any good success to the Queen 
or her friends." 



348 EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND TAKEN. [.TAN. 

SIR HENRY RATCLIFFE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It maye please your Lordship to understand that the takyng 
of the Earl of Northumberland* hathe partly moved hope 
of quietnes here and in other partes of this realme, whom I 
wishe here in safe custodie. 

If those partes is or may be lefte in such securyty as no 
sudden attempt or renewing of rebellion may offend, or over- 
throw that which hitherto is well begunne, (having also 
shewed some such execution as is convenient for such a 
lewde attempt, as well for the punishment of that which is 
past, as for terror and example of that which may come,) I 
wishe your Lordship heartily here, and then I doubt not but 
your Lordship shall well answer all observations, purge all 
dowtes, put away all suspicion, and extinguish all malices 
or slanderous events or reports. 

If your Honor do well weigh the using of pardoning, 
or gifte of life, landes, or goodes, you shall do well, for 
that I heare much muttering thereof, but your Lordship 
knows best what you have to do. 

Your Lordship's affayres for your sutes in lawe for Rysley, 
remaynes to be tryed the fyrste of the terme, October or 
Hilary, when, if you come not, I praye your Lordship directe 
me your pleasure therein, as you shall think good, either 
to my Lord Keeper, Mr. Secretary, and others, or to the 
Queue's Majestic, or bothe, for that ther is no order taken for 
the staye of tryall. 

I remayne for my owne causes in pristine statu. This in 
haste. I wyshe myself with your Lordship, and in the mean- 
tyme God prosper you and your doings ! From the courte, 
the 4th of January, 1569. Wishing to heare shortely from 
you, 

Your Lordship's assured loving brother, 

HENRY RADECLYFF. 

* He was taken by the Regent of Scotland from the borderers, but 
was not delivered to the English for some time. 



1570.] STATE OF THE NORTH COUNTRY. 349 

THE BISHOP OF DURHAM TO CECIL. 

Jesus help. Right Honourable, according to your Honor's 
appointment I have sent my man to know by your gut 
ineanes the Queue's Majestie's pleasure for my repairing 
homeways. Now my Lord Sussex is come, I trust some 
gut order shall be taken for the country. If my person 
might do any gut, I wold attend as your wisdom shall think 
mete, or appoint me. The country is in great misery, and, as 
the sheriff writes, he cannot do justice by any number of 
juries of such as be untouched in this rebellion, unto they 
be author quieted by law, or pardoned by the Quene's Ma- 
jestie. The number of offenders is so great, that few inno- 
cent are left to try the guilty. And if the forfeited lands be 
bestowed on such as be strangers, and will not dwell in the 
country, the people shall be without heads, the country 
desert, and no number of freeholders to do justice by juries 
nor serve in the wars. 

What comfort it is to go now into that country for him 
that wold live quietly, your wisdom can easily judge. But 
God is present ever with his people, and his vocation is 
not rashly to be forsaken, nor his assistance to be dowted 
on. His gut will be done ! And if I go down in displea- 
sure, my person shall do more harm than gut. The Lord 
grant you his spirit of wisdom, to provide for this afflicted 
realm. 4 January. 

Yours ever, 

JA. 

1 Either. 



350 STATE OF THE REBELS IN SCOTLAND. [JAN. 

ALLAYN KING TO SIR HENRY PERCY.* 

Right Worshipful, may it please, as this night late came 
Robert Shaftoef to Tynemouth, whose coming was purposely 
to have spoken with you, and for that his chance was so ill 
as that he came too late, and that he hathe with great im- 
portancy caused me to wryte, wherein if your Worship 
shall have any mislyking of me, I crave but my true intent 
for my excuse. My Lord of Northumberland is in Eden- 
brough, and not in ward, but in the keeping of my Lord Re- 
gent, who hathe gyven unto my Lord license to lye in the 
towne of Edenburgh, with a garde of the Regent's men ; 
and my Lord hathe of his own men seven principall. James 
Swyno J and William Burton, and the rest, have lyberty to 
come at tymes, who lye in the country to the number of six- 
teen. My Lord's request is by Robert to you, who is both in 
great distresse and misery at this present, cleane without 
apparel or money, &c., of all brotherlynes to extend your 
lyberalitie to releve him withall at this his present necessitie ; 
and also he desyreth you to wryte or send him word of such 
newes as you may imparte him withall ; first, what lyking the 
nobility hath of his trouble; secondly, how or in what case 
his frends, men, and those that were with him are used; 
thirdly, of his children. My Lady of Northumberland hathe 

* Sir Henry Percy was the younger brother of the Earl of Northum- 
berland, and, remaining faithful to the Queen, succeeded to the titles 
and estates, after his brother's execution. He afterwards joined in 
Lord Paget's attempt to liberate Mary Queen of Scotts, and, being 
committed, shot himself in prison to prevent his attainder. Allayn 
King seems to have been a partisan of the rebels. This letter would 
lead us to believe that Sir Henry Percy's show of fidelity to the Queen 
was not quite sincere. 

f Robert Shaftoe was one of those who escaped with the Earls ; he 
took refuge with a borderer, the Laird of Bedrule. 

t Several of this name were engaged in the rebellion. Ralph Swyno 
escaped to Hume Castle, where he and others remained with the 
Countess of Northumberland. 



1570.] COUNTESS OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 351 

her heartily commended unto you, who craves and desires 
of your counsel in the behalf of my Lord. My Lady lies 
as yet at Fernyhurst, but the Lord Hume hath written license 
for her to come to him, which she will. She might have 
access to my Lord to Edenbrouge, but she thinks not so 
good as yet, till she have some more warrants from the Lord 
Regent, for that she being at liberty, she is able to make 
some shift for my Lord now, and has already sent home 
to her friends ; as to my Lord of Worster,* and to other of 
her friends. Her request also is, that if you would send some 
trusty man of your own to my Lord and her, you might 
pleasure them very much, and they wold discourse unto him 
of such things as are yet in safety, which might be now to 
their relieves, or at the least it might come to your hands. 
Farther my Lady wold that you should understand, that the 
disagrement that was amongst them chiefly was the cause 
of this their mishap and ill fortune to sever and fly. Also 
for my Lord Taker's breche that hath been aforetyme, he 
hath showed himself a sowgfull (?) man, who is as yet thought 
and no otherwise known to my Lady, but that he will 
assist them if they will come into England, or when they 
come. There has messenger passed atwixte them, whereby 
it is supposed that he shall incline himself to th'earles, 
and to their power that they loke to have of Scottishemen, 
As first, they are assured of the Lord of Argile, the Earl 
Huntley, the Lord of Grange, who hath promised them that 
they shall have what he may do, and those friends that he 
hath in captivity, and will not deliver over the castle of 
Edenbrough to the Regent, who has demanded it and can- 
not have it. 

The Regent should have gone to Dumbarton, which is 

* The Countess of Northumberland was Anne, daughter of Henry 
Somerset, second Earl of Worcester. She escaped to the borders, first 
to Fairnyhurst, and then to Hume Castle. She seems to have been an 
intriguing woman, and lived long afterwards on the continent, busy in 
all the plots of the refugees. 



352 THE EARL OF WESTMORELAND. [JAN. 

besieged by the Regent's power against the Quene's friends, 
but for that he cannot have Edenbroughe castell. He lyeth 
still in the towne of Edenbroughe, At my Lord of North- 
umberland's first coming into Scotlande, the Regent did not 
nor wold not talk with him in three dayes together ; but after 
they had mett and talked they otherwayes agreed, and many 
tymes talked. The Marshal of Barwyke dyd talke with my 
Lord in Jedworthe. My Lord Regent was once on the waye 
to have fetched my Lady of Northumberland from the Lord 
of Fernyherst, but he returned backe agayne. The Lord Re- 
gent had lyked to have gotten betrayed the Earle of 
Westmoreland, at a place called Blood-lanes ; it is the Lord 
of Fernyhurst's ; but he got knowledge, and so escaped that 
end. Nowe he is at lyberty, and rydeth where he wyll. It 
is thought that Scotland shall breake within eight dayes with 
the Earles. There are certayne merchants of Edenbroughe 
come out of Flanders, whose ships are stayed here, and they 
reporte that the Duke d'Alva and his power are ready, and 
some of his horsemen were shipt afore they came. But no 
man knoweth of theyr landing, where nor when. My Lady 
of Northumberland's earnest request is for your counsell, and 
what you would have done herein. Robert Shaftoe will 
staye at his father's till he heare of you, which he most hum- 
blye desyreth. This trusting your Worshippe will not have 
any myslyking for this wryting, I wish for your prosperous 
returne, and encrease of worshippe. From the Quene's Ma- 
jestie's castell of Tynemouth, the 6th of January, 1569. If 
your Worshippe wold have any sent, Robert Shaftoe wyll 
both carry him safe, and bryng hym agayne. 
Your obedyant servant, 

ALLAYNE KYNG. 

May it please you, sir, my Lady of Northumberland hathe 
sent to my Lady, and earnestly desyreth her to send her some 
apparell, as she is destitute bothe of wollen and lynnen. 



1570.] EXECUTIONS OF THE KEBELS. 353 

My Lord also writ to Mr. Medcaufe,* of Alnwycke, for 
forty pounds that remains in his hands, but he cannot be 
found. If he be in England, may it please your worship 
to let him understand of the same. 



JOHN LEAGUE, SURGEON, TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

I 

Right Honourable, my duty remembered unto your Honour, 
at this time is to let you understand that Mr. Bishop is 
sore wounded upon the head with a bill, and hath great im- 
postumation because of the fraction of the skull, and is in a 
great consumption, therewithal, my Lord, he has a son 
that greveth him sore and is ever in his mind, which is in 
Durham at your Lordship's pleasure, whose name is Thomas 
Bishop. May it therefore please your Honour to give me 
the life of the said Thomas Bishop, I trust I should 
sooner, by the grace of God, recover the helthe of his father, 
because he is ever in his mind ; and, as his father says, he 
never did wear any armour, nor never came in battle ray with 
the rebels, but attending upon his father. 

Mr. Dudley made suit to the Lord Scrupe, Lord Warden, 
immediately after his coming from your Lordship, to send 
one Carter, a surgeon, and the Queue's servant, a gunner in 
Carlisle, whereby he might report the truth unto the Lord 
Warden to signify unto your Honour, who dealt with him be- 
fore my coming, and had used him very well, and was his 
request to signify unto your Honour. Thus the Lord pre- 
serve your Honour, both now and ever. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

JOHN LEACH. 



* The name of Leonard Metcalf occurs in the roll of attainders in 
this rebellion. 



VOL. I. A A 



354 EXECUTIONS OF THE REBELS. [JAN. 



MATTHEW SHAFTOE TO SIR HENRY PERCY. 

Sir, my dutie remembered, these are for Godde's sake 
to requeste you to direct your letters to my Lord Liefetenent 
for my brother's life, who is judged to dye, and was going to 
the place of execution this daye ; and upon great suit I have 
stayed hym till to-morrow, and I hope that upon yourfrendly 
and earnest letter to my Lord, he shall be saved. 

For the truth is, that one James Shafto, of Tamfieldlighe, 
tenant to the Earl of Northumberland, is pry eked to dye, 
which is meant of my father,* and not of my brother, for he 
was never tenant to any man, and so I would have you to de- 
clare in your letters to my Lord, for so I have shewed to hym 
already, and that my brother was a household servant and a 
young man, and no retayner, and so, indeed, he was ever 
since I put hym to my Lord, which was not six weeks before 
this rebellion began. 

For Christ's passion, help nowe to save hys life, for to-mor- 
rowe he will suffer, unlesse your letters helpe, which I hope 
you will direct as favorable and earnest as may be, and declare 
therm how he is mistaken for the other James Shafto, because 
they be both of one name, for so have I sayd, and so I would 
you should say. And let my brother come to me with your 
letters to my Lord with all speed possible, for it requyreth 
haste. Unlesse you helpe, I can do nothing, for Mr. Slings- 
by is not at Durham, nor no other frend that can do me any 
pleasure, but you only ; and now you shall bynd us all to 
pray for you for ever in saving his life, which I think you 
may do by your favorable letters, if you come not your- 
self. Christ preserve you and all yours ! This Wednesday, 
1569. 

Yours at commandment, 

MATHEW SHAFTO. 

* Who had, probably, escaped, as did several of this name. 



1570.] THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 355 



SIR HENRY RATCLIFFE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

I have no news to write unto your Lordship, but that yes- 
terdaye Mr. Vice-Chamberlayn was made Treasurer, and Sir 
James Crofts, Comptroller, and Sir Robert Stafford, Ser- 
geant-porter. It is thought Sir Nicholas Throgmerton shall 
be Vice-Chamberlayn, and Mr. Thomas Heneage, Treasurer 
of the chamber. 

As I have before written, so do I find daily the occasions 
of the necessity in my judgment of your Lordship's repair 
hither. My Lord Steward (as divers times heretofore so 
styll to me), doth she we himself a friend to you and a liker 
and favorer of your doings and proceedings, which if your 
Lordship thinks so good, I would you toke knowledge 
thereof. 

I have understand by your assured friends, that my Lord 
of Bedford has well and friendly spoken in some matters 
touching your doings, and hath also requested me to recom- 
mend him to your Lordship, affirming that he minds not to 
desist from his begun good will in furthering of your pro 
ceedings, for I assuredly perceive that till your own coming 
and purgation, things will not be perfectly sound,for though 
the depth of suspicion may be removed, yet all jelousy is 
not put away ; and though the wound doth seem to be 
cured, yet I am feared the scarre doth remain, which not 
thoroughly healed may perhaps break out hereafter. 

My cosyn Roger Manners* has requested me to write 
to your Lordship for the begging of one of my Lord of Nor 
thuniberlande's faulkners : he can name none, but wold 
gladly have one that were good. 

Thus with my humble commendation, being desirous to 
hear of your proceedings and th'ende of those civil wars, 
and also what is become of the rest that is fled, I commit 

* Roger Manners, nephew of Edward, third Earl of Rutland, who 
afterwards succeeded his father, as fifth Earl. 

A A 2 



356 THE REBELS GOODS. [JAN. 

your Lordshipp to God, being advised by some of my frends 
to defer my owne causes tyll your coming, which I wyshe 
to be shortely. From the courte at Wyndsorr, the 8th of 
January, 1569. 

Your Lordship's assured loving brother, 

HENRY RADECLYFF. 

My Lady of Hunsdone dyd require me to wryte unto your 
Lordship, that she dyd not see her husbande or sonnes should 
be rewarded here, if they were not consydered there. Here 
be askers enough, and as I thynke nothyng worth the having 
unrequired. I remember the saying used to Mr. Bagnoll in 
the northe of Ireland, " kepe for me, Nicholas." I omit 
other matters I should wryte of for haste, but I praye you 
send me word whether as yet you may understand and neede 
my letters. 



SIR HENRY PERCY TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My humble duty to your good Lordship, passing by the 
younge ladys, * I found them in harde case, for neither had 
they any provision nor one peny to relieve them with, but 
some lyttell thinge from me. Thay wolde gladly be removed, 
their wante of fire is so grete, whose yeres may not well 
suffer that lack. I caused this berer to stay two younge 
horses, which were those my Lorde most estemed ; I wolde 
your Lordship shoulde sende for them with spede, they be sore 
ranged for ; one ther is that my Lorde of Hunsdon dyd give 
me a yere paste, which Mr. Vayghane -j- hath taken. I mynde 

* The daughters of the Earl of Northumberland. (?) 
f Perhaps the person whose name is said to have been used to 
frighten the Earl of Northumberland into action. " The same day at 
night," says Stowe, " certain conspirators perceiving the said Earl to be 
wavering and unconstant of promise made to them, caused a servant 
of his called Bekewith, (after he was laid in his bed) to bustle in, and 
to knock at his chamber doore, willing him in haste to arise and shifte 



1570.] THE REBELS GOODS. 357 

the same for my lady your wife, and truly he shall not have 
him with my good will. My Lord had a white janet, 
which is in the hands of Mr. Lenortte- Dacres ;* I pray you 
let him not pass your hands, for he represents the carry 
ing of a noble mane. As for the barb that Frevell spoke to me 
of, I have sifted the matter and perceive the same to be in 
the hands of Wallis, the bailiff, yet was he not at home in 
my passing by, therefore I could not speak with him, but I 
would your Lordship in time should send for it, and to de- 
liver this enclosed. I must crave pardon in making this com- 
position with your Lordship, and that is, if ever God of 
his grace and the Queue's Majestic of her mercy call him to 
his former estate, that he may have the same again, for that 
there was nothing of worldly goods he so much esteemed. 
This bearer was my Lorde's servant, and comes to your Lord 
ship for mercy, into whose hands he commits his life. And 
thus I humbly take my leve, wishing to your Lordship 
your hearte's desire. From Screuynge, this 9th of January, 
1569. 

Your Lordship's assured to command, 

H. PERCY. 

Before the enclosing of this letter, the bailiff came to me, 
so that I have taken order for the barb. He repares to your 
Lordship, to whom I humbly crave your Lordship's favour ; 
he is but simpell, very honest. Theris great spoil of things, 
as he will show. For God's sake, help ! that all be not 
ruined, by your good means. What service I or mine may 
do, shall be to your Lordship. 

H. PERCY. 

for himself, for that his enemies (whom he termed to be Sir Oswold 
Westrop and Master Vaughari) were about the park, and had beset 
him with numbers of men." 

* Leonard Dacres, second son of William, Lord Dacres, who at this 
period acted a double part, pretending fidelity to the Queen, but soon 
after he raised open rebellion, was defeated by Lord Hunsdon, and fled 
the kingdom. 



358 COUNTESS OF WESTMORELAND. [MARCH, 



THE COUNTESS OF WESTMORELAND* TO CECIL. 

Right Honorable, I beseche you beare with my importu- 
nitie, and let it not offend you, that I earnestly crave your 
goodnes to be a sutor for me to the Quene's Majestic, to give 
me leave to come to her royall presence, which altho my 
Lord's doings have bene suche as they much abasse me so to 
do, yet myne owne innocencie, and the great desire I have to 
do my humble dutie to her Highnes, something imboldeneth 
me to contynue this my sute, trusting muche by your 
frendshipp and good helpe to obtayn the same, otherwise it 
wold be a greater grief unto me, then all my other miseries. 
Thus beseching you to take pitie of my miserable and un- 
fortunate estaite, I cease to trouble you. At Hawerd's house,t 
the 23rd of Marche, 1569. 

Your most humble sutor, 

J. WESTMERLAND. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Right Honorable my very good Lord, I have receaved 
your Lordship's letter of the 18th of this present, wrytten at 
Yorke, and in the same a cipher to be used when occasion 

* Jane (not Anne, as in the Peerages) Countess of Westmoreland 
was sister of the Duke of Norfolk. 

t Howard House. 

J Randolph, after his return from Russia, was now again sent into 
Scotland, to negotiate border matters, and his proceedings were, as it 
appears, in some measure made dependent on the Duke of Sussex. 
In the month of January, after his return from the borders, the Regent 
Murray was murdered at Linlithgow by a Hamilton, whose enter- 
prise appears to have been connected with the same plots as had pro- 
duced the rebellion of the two northern Earls. The next night the 
Carr of Fairnihurst, and the Scotts of Buccleugh, with the borderers 



1570.] STATE OF SCOTLAND. 359 

scrveth. Where your Lordship desires to know the state of 
this country, it requires so long time to make full declare 
tion thereof, that I would be very loathe to delay the answer 
of your Lordship's letter until that might be done so amply, 
as I would your Lordship should be informed. But that 
your Lordship may know so much as presently can be writ- 
ten, until farther leisure, it may please your Lordship to 
understand, that I find this country so divided, that I 
know not ho we to unite them, but by such aide as must be 
given from some part to the one, that may constrain the 
other to obey to reason. And as now the question is, who 
shall govern, the King or Queue, so may her Majestic em- 
ploy that support she minds to give where she like, 
seeing I cannot judge which number is greatest, though I do 
account much better of th'one than of the other, and how 
they are divided, your Lordship shall see in a writing here- 
with sent,* the copy of the same that I have sent unto her 



who were most zealous for the Queen of Scots, invaded the English 
border, and spread devastation far and near. The violence of the face 
tions in Scotland rendered it impossible for the new regent, Lenox, to 
remedy the evil, and the Earl of Sussex, with the English army, passed 
the border, and took a signal vengeance on the offending clans. In 
the first invasion not less than three hundred villages were burnt, and 
about fifty castles razed to the ground. 

Lethington as well as Grange had joined the faction, who wished to 
bring back their Queen, and who opposed the party in power. 

* The enclosure here alluded to, is this 

" The names of such as remain at theK. of Scot's obedience, and have 
subscribed to his authority : Earls Lennox, Morton, Anguish, Mar, 
Glancarne, Boughan,Cassels,Montrose,Marshall,Arrell,Monteithe; Ba- 
rons Lyndesay, Ruthen, Simple, Ocletrie, Glammes, Carcathe, Meffin, 
Bortwicke, Drommond, Salton, Syncler ; Bishops and Abbots, 20. The 
most part of the Barons, with Bourgoyses of all the chief towns. 
Graynge, Captain of the Castle; Liddington, L. Secretary; Mr. James 
Magill, Clerk of the Register ; Mr. John Spens, Advocate to the 
King; Justice Clerk; the Treasurer. 

"Doubtful persons,but such as have subscribed to the King's autho- 



360 STATE OF SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

Majestie's self, with my last letters of the 22nd of this instant, 
with full answer of all matters hytherto commytted unto my 
charge, and what was done and concluded this laste conven- 
tion, in which her Majestie's offers for the mayntaynance of 
religion, contynuance of amytie, and perservation of the King, 
is well receaved, and an ambassador appoynted to be sent to 
her Majestic to consummate the promises, and making of 
the assurances that shall pass between her Majestic and suche 
as stande with the King's authoritie. Touching the revenge 
of the injuries done to the Quene my mistres' subjects, I see 
the good wylles of maiiie to concur with your Lordship, but 
fynde no lykelihood of the doing, seeing there is yet no es- 
tablished authority to command, nor obedience to any man 
that myndeth never so well. Your Lordship muste, as fan- 
as I see, truste to your own forces, and the sooner it may be 
done the better, and as they shall approache the borders, the 
sooner resolution will be taken with the nobilitie what theie 
will do, and kiiowne unto us what theie shall be able to do. 
For the deliverie of the rebelles, as manie as are in the King's 
obedience, and allowe of justice, are well content to have them 
delivered, but being all out of their hands, (saving my Lord 
of Northumberland,) it is out of their power to performe their 
good willes, and therin other meanes may be used that must 
bothe reforme the one and the other. 

Out of France, there is a Monsieur come to Dimbar, called 
Verrac, a gentleman of the chamber. He hath brought 
letters, but of an olde date, viz. the 1 Oth of Februarie, to the 
noblemen, whether to all, or the one faction, I know not as 
yet, but look shortly to be better informed to what effecte, or 
where about he goeth. Seeing I have here nothing to do 
myself until the first of May, that the next convention begins, 

rity, and voted the same in Parliment. Earls Huntlie,, Athal, Cray- 
forde, Eglinton, Catnes ; Bishops of Atheries, Pettinwini ; Lords 
Ogleby, Fortbois, Hume, Oliphant, Zester. 

"Utter ennemies. All the Hamiltons, Argile, Boyde, Fleminge, 
Seton, Heries, St. Cosme." 



1570.] BOMELIUS THE ASTROLOGER. 361 

and all the Lords departed to their own houses, not so much 
as one here present, I mind also, God willing, if I can escape 
between the Lord Hume and the Lords of Twedale, that 
breeds all this cumber, to be at Berwick very shortly, to 
meet and attend upon your Lordship, until some such time of 
service be, where I may do good either here or elsewhere, 
and write my mind more at large, and with better suerty than 
I can here at this time, all matters standing in such terms as 
now they do. And thus most humbly I take my leave. At 
Edenbourge, the 28th of March, 1570. 

Your honourable Lordship's to command, 

THO. RANDOLPH. 






THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO CECIL. 

Sir, your Honour shall be advertised, that where this after- 
noon or to-morrowe I was minded to have taken bond of 
Bomelius * shortly to have departed the realm, according to 
such purpose as hath been a good time in me toward him, 
and not disliked by neither of her Majestie's counsel, as Sir 
William Fitzwilliams told me from my Lord Keeper and 
from you, to prevent this my doing, this Bomelius this morn- 
ing sent his wife to me with these letters enclosed, and be- 
cause the contents be of high importance, I thought it the best 
to send him to your Honours of the counsel, where ye may 
examine him most sufficiently. What he hath to say I 
know not, but I fear that the devil is busy in mischief. It 
were good ye knew it, and the more I suspect malice, hearing 
but yesterday of a mischievous intended practise (if it be 

* This Bomelius was a great astrologer and magician, who had cast 
the Queen's nativity, and declared that the present year would witness 
much trouble and difficulty, and that there was danger of a great 
change. He had been imprisoned for practising physic without licence, 
and probably, as Strype observes, for "some other dangerous prac- 
tics." 



362 ATTEMPT AGAINST ARCHBISHOP PARKER. [APRIL, 

true) of poysoning of her Ma jostle's shippes in the ordinance 
and victayle. 

I see Judas non dormit, and some spite hath reached to 
myself but this last terme, where quidamjilii Beliall did gauge 
my poore barge in dy vers places in the bottom, that if it had 
not bene spied, I was lyke to have drenched in the myddes 
of the Temys, no grete losse of such one as I am, but I wold 
have bene sory my famyly to have peryshed, or that such 
incircumcisi Philistei should have gloryed to insult with ubi 
est Dem eorum, fyc. 

I shall still praye to God for the protection of you all. If 
this man's story be but an astrological experiment or pre- 
diction, it is the lesse, but I feare furder of some conspiracie 
before Easter. I gave hym lybertie to be an open prisoner in 
the King's benche, where before he was a close prysoner, but I 
charged the keper that he should practise no more upon the 
Queue's subjects. Whether any practitioner hath resorted to 
hym (as many have a wonderful confidence in hym and in 
his magike), I know not. What he hathe to utter, ye may 
learne. Sub omni lapide scorpio latet, yet quia timidi mater 
nonfat, I am thus bolde, peradventure more suspicious then 
I nede, but I referre all to your wisdom. From my house, 
the third of Aprile. 

Your Honor's in Christ, 

MATTHUE CANTUAR. 



THE LORD OF LETHINGTON TO . 

Take not in evil part of this long time ye have receaved no 
letters from me, albeit I have receaved divers from you. The 
cause was for no means I could make, I could not convey 
any to you. Albeit ye may tlunk me negligent in writing, 
some men in Scotland think I have been more busy in doing 
than they allow of, and will recompense me accordingly, and 
they may get their hand beyond me by any fashion, but that 



1570.] THE ENGLISH ARMY ENTERS SCOTLAND. 363 

shall be as late as I may. The bearer can declare you the 
whole state of the country ; what the nobility has done in the 
Queue's causes, and of the in-coming of a part of the English 
forces to this town,* and passing forward they gave it out to 
us that they will not meddle with the division of titles, and 
in the mean season they own they join their forces with five 
or six Lords to suppress the rest ; wherein I marvel mickle 
how the Quene's Majestic of England is advised to cast off 
the amity of all Scotland for the pleasure of such a few number 
ber that cannot at length serve her Highness turn in any 
thing, and whose forces her subjects that are here can testify 
to be of so small moment, that now this day when they 
past towards Lithquo, all the Scottismen that are in their 
company hath not made them two hundred horses. It 
is a mystery to me whereof I cannot conceive the reason, 
that so many noblemen who would be glad to do the Queen 
of England service, should be altogether neglected by her for 
the pleasure of a few inferior to them in degree, forces and 
all other things, whereby otherwise they who were well 
affected to the Queen of England are constrained to seek 
foreign aid for their defence. 

* " When the English rebels had now retired themselves into the 
innermost parts of Scotland, and associating themselves with other 
men of their quality, threatened fire and sword to the borderers in 
England, and to those of the King's party in Scotland, Sussex, as soon 
as Drury was returned, sent him back again the seventh day after into 
Scotland, with twelve hundred foot and four hundred horse, who at 
Coldingham received hostages for the Earls of Angus, Morton, 
Mar, and Glencarne, and for the Barons of Reuven and Lindsay, 
who had with much entreaty invited the English. Afterwards Sussex 
himself marched to Edinborough, and joined his forces with the 
said carlos, and with Lenox. All these march by Lithquo (Linlith- 
you) to Glasgow, from whence Hamilton, Duke of Castle-Herald, had 
withdrawn himself. From thence they turned aside to Hamilton 
castle, which being 'battered with great ordnance, was soon reduced 
and half razed. A gcod town also of the Hamilton's was fired, and 
their possessions everywhere cruelly wasted all over Cluidsdale, as 
was also in their return Hamilton's palace at Lithquo." Camden. 



364 THE ENGLISH ARMY IN SCOTLAND. [MAY, 

The principals of this nobility have written long since to 
the Quene of England, but as yet have received no answer. 
This faction that aspires to rule without reason, and can be 
content neither of fellowship nor union, lays the whole bur- 
then on me, and makes me the author of all things, thinking 
that they might have carried away the ball, they alone, and 
haled the duill without impediment, if I had not cast a trump 
in their way by this meane. 

They go about to make me odious to England, yet I have 
dealt so plainly with England by my letters to my Lord of 
Leicester, that I think they have cause to judge well of me. 
I fear Mr. Randolph hath been an evill instrument, and can- 
not believe the Queue's Majestic would have taken the course 
she runnes, if she had been truly informed of the state here, 
as I went about to do by my letters to my Lord of Leicester, 
whereof I could never get answer. Because I have informed the 
bearer of all things, I will not trouble you with many words, 
but pray you that I may be sufficiently and truly informed of 
the state there, Vhereof I shall make the best to serve the 
turne. Every way, be sure I shall not be Lothe's wife. So I 
commit your Lordship to God. From the castell of Ederiburgh, 
the 17th day of May, 1570. 

Your Lordship's always to command, 



CECIL TO NICHOLAS WHITE. 

Mr. Whyte, I cannot well resolve what to wryte, such are 
the varieties and changes of tymes, that may alter my ad- 
vertisements betwixt my wryting and your receipt. Ther- 
fore 1 will wryte of things not subject to change by me 
whilest I lyve. I do contynue and will not desist to love 
hardly the honest virtues which I am persuaded are settled 
and rooted in you, for the which I love you, and so will, 
except you make the change. I am as you have known me 



1570.] CECIL AND NICHOLAS WHITE. 365 

if not more tormented with the blasts of the world, willing to 
lyve in calm places, but it pleases God otherwise to exercise 
me, in sort as I cannot shun the rages thereof, though his 
goodness preserves me as it were with the targett of his pro 
vydence, from the dangers that are gaping upon me. Vita 
hominis est militia super terram. I use no armour of proof 
against the darts or pelletts, but confidence in God by a clear 
conscience. Enough of these matters, for I know they will 
make you sad. Your suit hath been long asleep, not 
stirred, by reason of the noisome tumults of other affairs. 
In the end it is granted by her good Majesty, as by a clause 
included you shall see, as her Majesty hath written the same 
in her letters to my Lord Deputy. 

I thank you for your horse, and so will my wife for other 
things of too much chardges to you. But truly you cannot 
overcome her in good will, as I many times find by her 
earnest dealing and memories of you. 

God send me some intermission from busynes to meditate 
privately upon his marvellous worth, and to exercise my 
thankfulness for his mercies and benefits. And so farewell, 
my good Nicholas White. From Hampton Court, the 26th 
of May, 1570. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. CECIL. 

Mr. Dillon can report all the court news, and perchance 
hath heard more than he will carry for truth with him. Such 
is the plenty here, to make many times ex nihilo multi. 



QUEEN ELIZABETH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

BY THE QUEEN. 

ELIZABETH R. 

Right trusty and right wel-beloved cousin, we great you 
well. Where of late we advertised you in what sort we did 
answer and return the commentator of Dunfermling, whereby 



366 ELIZABETH ENCOURAGES THE REGENT. [JUNE, 

we dowte that the party favoring us, (from which he was ad- 
dressed,) may enter into some furder dowte of our maynteii- 
ance of them then were mete or then we have cause, and seke 
by indirect meanes to procure some end with the contrary part, 
we having, since the departure of the said Dunfermling, found 
some new intercourse taken here and practised on the Scottish 
Quene's behalf to abuse us, have therefore thought good not 
to proceede either in such sort or with such spede to her 
avantage as before we were inclined. 

And therefore we require you spedily and secretly to ad- 
monish our party there not to conceave any misliking by any 
part of our answer to Dunfermling, nor of any avantage that 
either the Quene of Scotts or her party shall make of our deal- 
ing with them, for indede we have lately found cause, that if 
the Bishop of Rosse* were not already gone to the Quene his 
mistres, he should not have gone, neither should have had any 
dealing in these matters. And it shall shortly appear, when 
he shall returne, their accompts of their avantages shall not 
be warranted, as they shall pretend. And therefore in the 
meane tyme we require you to comfort our party there, that 
in no wise they shrink or yield to the contrary. Given under 
our signet, at our honor of Hampton Court, the 6th of June, 
in the 12th year of our reigne. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Right honorable my verie good Lord, I have receaved your 
Lordship's letters of the 10th of this instant, as also the coppie 
of the Quene's Majestie'sf contayning some more comforte to- 
wards thys Kynge's partie then was shewen unto the Com- 
mendator at his departure from the courte. I have com- 

* He was arrested this year under charge of having been concerned 
in the rebellion of the Northern carles, 
t Probably the preceding letter. 



1570.] STATE OF SCOTLAND. 367 

municated the whole unto my Lord of Morton, who hotly 
conceived some better hope of the matter then before, though 
not without great perplexity what may be done in a case 
so full of difficulty, and therefore minds for the better esta- 
blishing of all matters that concern the amity between 
these two countries, and that your Lordship may the better 
understand the affections of men presently here at the 
Queue's Majestie's devotion, he minds out of hand to 
send your Lordship Mr. Archibalde Duglas, who will be with 
your Lordship by Thursday at none, and at Sterlinge again 
at the meeting of the Lords there, which will be upon Son- 
day next, where I mind to be upon Saturday next, as 
also my Lord of Morton, with whom I ride. 

Because I understand that both my Lord of Lenox and 
my Lord of Mar had received some intelligence to their 
dyscontentement of the answer given to the Commentator of 
Domfermeling, I have this day written to them both, to 
retain them in good hope until I may speak with them- 
selves. In the mean time God I trust will work somewhat to 
their comfort or better contentation. 

I find that theie are not determined to alter their course of 
obedience to their King. I believe that theie will resolve 
shortly upon some authority to govern this state, wherein as 
theie would gladly have had the Queue's Majestie's advise, 
so see theie that it can be no longer delayed without peril 
to the whole. 

Unhappy brutes are here spread abroad of some new 
commotions about Midsommer next, that is said unto me 
shall paye home. Divers have demanded of me of the Queen 
our mistress health, and whether the Duke's Grace be alive, 
as one special sent unto me this morning out of the 
c as tell to know it. 

I spake yesterday with one that lately came from Aber- 
deen to the Earl of Morton, to receive some advise from 
certain that remain at the King's obedience what were fit 
for them to do in case the Earl of Huntley's should with force 



3G8 SCOTTISH NEWS. [JUNK, 

compell men to obeye the Queue's autority, to whom his an- 
swer was, that in any case theie sholde withstande it, and 
sholde not lacke that supporte that the other partie were able 
to give them. Whatsoever is intended, theie convene no we at 
Aberdyne, the Erles of Huntlye, Athall, and Crayforde, Lord 
Arbrothe, Lord Oglebye, Lord Secretarie. 

Their hope of France is not so greate as it was, for since 
the departure of the Frenchman, theie never hearde thence. 

The Ladie of Northumberlande lyeth in olde Aberdyne, in 
the Chanceler's howse, placed by the Lord Seton, and as it is 
sayde heareth masse dayly. 

It is reported that the Earle of Westmorelande is imbarked 
thence for Flanders, with certayne in his companie. What 
is become of Leonard D acres, I knowe not. 

I have no farther to trouble your Lordship, but humbly 
take my leave. 

At Edenbourge, the 13th of June, at three after noone. 
Your honorable Lordship's bounde at commande, 

THO. RANDOLPHE. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

Maye it please your Lordship, T receaved this daye this 
letter out of the castle to be sente unto your Lordship. I 
praye God it contayne good matter, whereof the moste parte 
of men do dowte, that heare of his doings. I heare for cer- 
tayne that the soldiers of Brigham have put themselves into 
the Regent's will, twelve score under four captaines. It is 
thoughte that he intendeth either to the Earle of Huntlye 
before his returne, or to dryve him oute of the countrye. 

Liveston came to this towne this daye, and so to the castle, 
where he tolde that the peace is made in France,* that the 
Duke is at libertie,f and the Duke of Alva with a great force 

* With the Protestants. f The Duke of Norfolk. 



1570.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 369 

upon the sea, supposed that he will land in Scotland. I 
have spoken with Moon, who I thynk knows more of 
the truth then the other, and as it bredeth comfort to some, 
so I know what other will dowte that what may ensue 
thereof, either for the advancement or hinderance of the causes 
now in hand. I have no more to trouble your Lordship 
with at this time, wherefore I take my leave. 
At Edenbourge, the 12th of August, 1570. 

Your honourable Lordship's ever to command, 

THO. RANDOLPHS. 



QUEEN ELIZABETH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

BY THE QUENK. 

ELIZABETH R. 

Right trusty and right well beloved cousin, we great you 
well. We have seen your several letters to our Secretary of 
the 4th and 6th of this month, and with them the copies of 
sundry letters sent from Levinston, Lyddington, Randolph, 
and the Regent, and your answers to the same, and your 
further directions that you have taken for the aide and relief 
of the party favourable to us, in all which we are right sates 
fied, as therein beholding the continuance of your care and 
wisdom in our service. And amongst other things we have 
taken great pleasure to read your answers to Lyddington, 
wherein, besides your other good gifts proper to a nobleman, 
and mete for the place that ye hold under us, we do certainly 
see such a sufficiency of wisdom mixed with good learning, as 
we are glad to thynk that Lyddington, who is accounted the 
flower of the wits in Scotland, shall see himself overmatched, 
and we surely judge upon the matter much confounded, not 
only with the truth, but with the sharp and good order of the 
explaining of the same. Truly, cousin, we have always 
judged you wise, and we know you very sufficient for the place 
you hold, but we have not seen at any time a more absolute 

VOL. i. B B 



370 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [AUG. 

proof of your witt and learning, then in these your late answers 
to Lyddington, and we fynd all others that do reade the same 
to be of like opinion. For one matter, wherof you desire 
answer, which is, what assurance you shall require of the 
Duke and his partye for performance of the act wherof we 
accorded to the Bishop of Ross, upon consideration of 
your owne writing, doubting that they will not give hostages, 
we think it sufficient at this tyme to have their writings with 
their hands and scales, as Lyddington semeth to offer. But 
if there shall followe hereafter any argument for the Quene of 
Scotts, we must ofnecessitie then have hostages of good per- 
sons and some castels, either in our own possession, or the pos- 
session of such as shall be thought will allwayes depend upon 
us, and upon the-yong King. And so we see yourself doth 
alwayes by your writing to Lyddington press, that the 
suretyes to be made for us must be of that nature, that they 
may be in our possession to command, and not depend at the 
pleasure of them from whom they shall precede. We are 
sorry that you could not have attempted the enterprise upon 
the west borders without money, wherof some portion is 
already [upon the waye, and we wishe ye could devise 
how to borow any furder somme there, to be repayd here at 
London, because that the cariage is so tedious and dilatory. 
And upon your letters and the Treasorer's bills, the same shal 
be payd. 

Given under our signet, at our manor of Cheneys, the 12th 
day of August, 1570, the 12th yere of our reigne. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

I have receaved your Lordship's letters of the 16th of this 
present, with the letters to the Regent, to the Lords Liveston 
and Liddington, and the coppie of the same to myself, and 
for the publishing of your Lordship's intent in this jorn aye I 



1570.] SUSSEX ENTERS SCOTLAND. 371 

have done and do as much as I can. I perceive now that 
Lyddington is caste behind hand, and put besides his diet. 
He must now run another course, or else it will be hard for 
him to come to the part he looked for. I send your Lord 
ship a letter sent unto me from the Regent. If any such 
thing be agreed, your Lordship knows, which carries no 
probability with it; but because it is a thing that will most 
discontent the people, it is devised to make them have an evil 
opinion of the Queen my mestres, as also that brute sprede here 
that your Lordship was minded to besiege this Castle, in 
which he hath presently two hundred and twenty persons, 
and doth believe that he is able to keep it for a whole 
year against either England or France. 

The Earl of Huntley, with that force he had, eight hun- 
dred persons, came into Anguish after the Regent's departure, 
burnt a hows and a mill, broke the grindstones, and 
went his way.* I will trouble your Lordship no longer. 

God prosper your Lordship in your journey, and good 
success in all that your Lordship takes in hand. 

At Edenbourge, the 21st of August, 1570. 

Yours ever to command, 

THO. RANDOLPHE. 

The brute is that the Lord of Boyd is taken. 



TO THE COUNTESS OF SHREWSBURY.! 



My most humble duty remembered unto your honourable 

* This exploit of the Earl of Huntley will give a good idea of the 
kind of depredations carried on by Mary's friends in Scotland, and 
by her borderers on the English. 

t Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of John Hardwick, of Hardwick 
in Derbyshire. She was the Earl's second wife, and had before been 
thrice married, first to Robert Barley, of Barley in Derbyshire, se- 

BB 2 



372 CONSPIRACY IN NORFOLK. [AUG 

good Ladyship, may it please the same to understande, that 1 
have sent you here inclosed the articles of peace concluded 
and proclaimed through all Fraunce,* in Frenche, because 
they be not at this hour to be had in Englishe (which be 
translated, and in printing,) and if the peace be kept, the 
Protestants be indifferently well. The great sitting is done at 
Norwiche, and I do heare credibly that Apellyerde, Throug- 
morton, Redman, and another, is condemned to be hanged, 
drawen, and quartered ; and Robert, and two moo, be con- 
demned to perpetuall imprisonement, with the losse of all 
their goodes and landes during their lives ; the four con- 
demned for high treason, and th'other for reconsilement.f 
They were charged of these four pointes ; the destruction of 
the Quene's person ; the imprisonment of my Lord Keper, 
my Lord of Leicester, and Secretary Cicell ; the setting at 
libertie out of the tower the Duke of Norfolke ; and the ba- 
nishement of all strangers ; and it fell out in their examina- 
tion that they wolde have imprisoned Sir Christopher Haydon 
and Sir William Buttes, the Queue's levetenants.J None of 

condly to Sir William Cavendish, and next to Sir William St. Loo, 
captain of the guard to Queen Elizabeth. Lodge describes her " a 
woman of a masculine understanding and conduct ; proud, furious, 
selfish, and unfeeling." She died immensely rich, and left all her pro- 
perty to her children by Sir William Cavendish. 

* This was the close of the third civil war in France, during which 
the oppressed Protestants had been aided by Elizabeth, and in which, 
among others, the celebrated Sir Walter Raleigh had served as a vo- 
lunteer in their service. 

t Or misprision of treason. 

t Camden gives us a brief account of this plot. Certain Norfolk 
gentlemen, he tells us, with the intent of setting the Duke at liberty, 
proposed to take the opportunity of the fair at Harlston, and to gather 
the country people under pretence of driving out the poor Nether- 
landers, who had come into England to seek an asylum from the hor- 
rible persecutions of the Duke of Alva. It would seem, from their con- 
fessions, that their designs were connected with the whole series of 
plots which were at this time in working. Camden says that only 
three of the conspirators were executed. 



1570.] CONSPIRACY IN NORFOLK. 378 

them could excuse themselfs of any of the four points, save 
ing Appellyarde said that that he meant nothing towards 
the Quene's person, for that he meant to have had them to 
a banquet and to have betrayed them all, and have won 
credit thereby with the Queen. Througmorton was mute, and 
would say nothing till he was condemned, who then said, 
st They be full merry now that will be as sorry within these 
few days." Mr. Bell was attorney for Mr. Gerard, he 
being one of the judges ; and Mr. Bell alleged against Ap- 
pelyerde that he was consenting to the treason before, alleging 
one Parker's words, that was brought prisoner with Doctor 
Story out of Flanders, that Parker heard of the treason be- 
fore Nallard came over to the Duke of Alva. And there 
stood one Bacon by that heard Parker say so. My Lord 
offered a book to Bacon to swear. " O, my Lord," saith 
Appelyerde, "will you condemn me of his oath, that is 
registered for a knave in the Book of Mortars ?" 

They had set out a proclamation, and four provisies ; one 
was touching the wantonness of the court, and the other touch- 
ing this land to be conquered by the Scots ; and two moo 
that I cannot remember. There was many in trouble for 
speaking of seditious words. Thomas Sicell* said that the 
Duke of Norfolk was not of that religion, as he was ac- 
counted to be ; and that his cousin Sicell was the Quene's 
darling, who was the cause of the Duke of Norfolke's im- 
prisonement, with such like, who is put off to the next 
assize. Anthony Midelton said, " my Lord Morley is gone 

* " Richard Cecil, father of Lord Burghley, had a younger brother, 
David, who was probably the father of this Thomas. No notice is 
taken in the pedigrees of that time of David's issue, and it is not un 
likely that the Treasurer interfered to prevent any record of a Romish 
and disaffected branch of his family." Lodge. The latter part of this 
extract is a fair specimen of the ill feeling which runs too often through 
the works of the writers against Elizabeth. What reason can there 
be for attempting to throw a stain on the great minister, because a 
distant and obscure branch of his family wants a pedigree ? 



374 IMPRISONMENT OF DR. STORY. [AUG. 

to fet the Duke of Alva into Yermouthe, and if William Kete 
had not accused me, Througmorton, and the reste, we had had 
a hote harvest ; but if the Duke of Norfolke be alive, 'they all 
dare not put them to deathe." Medcalfe said that he wolde 
helpe the Duke of Alva into Yermouthe, and to washe his 
handes in the Protestantes' bloude. Marshame said, that my 
Lord of Leicester had two childerne by the Quene, and for 
that he is condemned to lose bothe his eares, or ells pay a 
hundred pounds presently. Chipline said, he hoped to see 
the Duke of Norfolke to be King before Michelmas next ; who 
doth interpret that he meant, not to be King of England, but 
to be King of Scotland. 

Mr. Bell and Mr. Sollicitor saide bothe to this effect to the 
prisoners, " What mad fellowes were ye, being all rank pa- 
pistes, to make the Duke of Norfolke your patrone, that is as 
good a Protestant as any is in England ; and, being wicked 
traitors, to hope of his helpe to your wicked intents and pur- 
poses, that is as true and as faythfull a subject as any is in 
this lande, saving only that the Quene is mynded to imprison 
him for his contempte." 

Doctor Story* is at Mr. Archdeacon Wattes' house, in cus- 
tody, besides Powles. Thurlby, late bishopp of Ely, dyed 
this last w^eeke at Lambethe. 

The Spanyshe Quene t is arrived in the Lowe Countries, 

* ({ And now the Duke of Alva prohibited all commerce with the En- 
glish, and appointed searchers, that nothing should be brought in or 
carried forth of the Netherlands by them ; amongst all which searchers 
John Story, an English fugitive, Doctor of the Lawes, was the most 
subtill and diligent ; who had before consulted with Prestall, a magi- 
cal impostour against the Queen's life, and had suggested counsels to 
the Duke of Alva for invading his country. But he being allured by a 
wile into a ship, which was reported to have brought over English 
merchandise and heretical books, they presently set sayle and brought 
him into England, where he was afterwards executed." Camden, in 
1569. 

t Anne, eldest daughter of Maximilian II., married to Philip II. of 
Spain. 



1570.] THE TURKS INVADE CYPRUS. 375 

and will embark as soon as may be. The Emperor is set- 
ting forward his other daughter* towards Mettes, to be mar- 
riot to the French King. 

It is written, by letters of the 28th of the last, from Venice, 
that the Turk hath landed in Cyprus a hundred thousand 
men or moo ; and has besieged the two great cities within 
that kingdom, Nicosia and Famagosta. At one assault at 
Famagosta they lost twelve thousand men, upon the which 
repulse the Beharbey ' of Nattolia, the general of the Turke's 
army, writ to the Great Turk his master, that he thought 
it was unvincible ; he answered that if they did not win 
it ere they came, they should be put to the sword at their 
return home. The Turk hath sent another army by land 
against the Venetians, into Dallmatia, and are besieging of 
Zara with twenty thousand footmen and twenty thousand 
horsemen, and divers towns they have taken, as Spalatro, 
Elisa, Eleba, and None, with great spoil and bloodshed ; 
and it is written that the Turke's several armies be above two 
hundrethe thousand men against the Venetians. The men 
first sent by the Venetians fell so into diseases by the way, 
as they were fain to prepare new men, which it is thought 
will hardly come to do any good in Cyprus. A man may 
see what account is to be made of these worldly things, as 
to see in a small time the third state of Christendom in 
security, power, and welthe, to be in danger of utter over 
throw in one year. 

They say my Lord of Leicester has many workmen at 
Killingworthe * to make his house strong, and doth furnish 
it with armour, munition, and all necessaries for defence. 
And thus Jesus have my Lord, and your Ladyship, and my 



* Elizabeth, second daughter of Maximilian, married to Charles IX. 
of France. 

i Begler-bey. 

+ Kenilworth. The Protestant nobles were now full of apprehen- 
sions of troubles soon to break out by the intrigues of the Catholics. 



376 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 

frendes, in his tuition, to God's pleasure. Scribeled at Lon- 
don, the last of August, 1570. 

Your good Ladyship's ever to commande during lyfe. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It may please your Lordship to be advertised, I have re- 
ceaved your letters by Reade, my Lord of Morton's servant, 
and have hearde his reporte of your Lordship's jorney, and 
also what answer he receaved of your Lordship of that he 
came for. I truste nowe those thinges will growe shortly to 
some quietnes upon the borders, if for performance of them 
there be as much diligens used of this parte as hathe bene. 

I have moved this daye the Regente for the meting. He 
came to towne upon Wensdaye, chiefely to take order there- 
for, attending only the coming of the Earle of Morton, which 
wil be this night or to-morrowe, and thereafter your Lordship 
shall knowe what is resolved therupon with all the speede 
that I can advertise your Lordship. There came into this 
towne with the Regent only the Earle of Marre. This daye 
there came the Lord Lindesaye, to morrowe the Lord Ruthen 
is looked for, and other, if theie be not staied at home to see 
what will become of the convention this daye at Donkell, 
where meete certayn of the Duke's friends, Argile, Athall, 
Huntlye, Liddingeton, and manye other of that sorte, to give 
answer unto the Lord Liveston for th'assistance of Englande, 
and to give audience unto the two straungers that came out 
of Flanders with Mr. John Hamilton, that arrived at Aber- 
dine. More of the certaintie of these matters your Lordship 
shall knowe so sone as I can. 

Whether it be for pollicie to make men think that Spaniards 
shall arrive, or a matter resolved on, I know not, but certaynly 
the havens and coaste of Aberdine and Mountros have bene 
lately sounded by men set to worke by the Earle of Huntlye. 



1570.] THE ENGLISH REBELS ESCAPE TO FLANDERS. 377 

A proclamation was lately made by him that all men should 
be in readiness within twenty-three hours warning, to with- 
stand the old enemies of England, that were coming to be- 
siege the castle of Edenbourge. 

It is written unto me for certain that the Lord Seton is 
departed into Flanders, and the Lady of Northumberland 
with him. It is also told me that my Lord of Westmorelande, 
Tempest, and some other, are ready to depart. Better as- 
assurance your Lordship shall have by the next. Moan, the 
Regent's servant, is found to be a trafiquer with contrary 
party to his master. Above twenty letters found about him, 
of these many in cipher from Liddington. Theie shall be all 
sent unto your Lordship, as also himself within very few 
days. The Lord of Graynge, with a little encouragement 
from your Lordship, and some good advise howe to stand 
assured to have no injury offred unto him by this state, may 
wyn him wholly to the King's obedience, wherein I would 
that he may have cause, notwithstanding anything past, to 
thynk himself beholding to your Lordship, for surely, my 
Lord, I cannot but deal for him as for one more worthy than 
the whole rowte of that faction. 

I shall not need to put your Lordship in remembrance 
how weak my credit is, nor how little I brought hither of my 
own. I trust also that it shall now stand with your Lord 
ship's pleasure, that I shall shortly repair towards your 
Lordship, with such a diseased body, that if I cannot find 
the means shortly to retire myself to some place where I 
may have it repaired, I must leave it here among those that 
I am sure for the most part care not howe short my life is. 
God keep your Lordship lunge in health, and send you 
much better then many of this country can afford you, or 
else it would be very hard with you. Humbly I take my 
leave. At Edenbourge, the first of September, 1 570. 
Your honourable Lordship's ever to command, 

THO. RANDOLPH*:. 



378 THE REBELS IN FLANDERS. [SEPT. 

SIR HENRY COBHAM * TO CECIL. 

(Antwerp, Sept. 4, 1570. Abstract.) 

He was advised that there were in this Flemish navie ap- 
pointed twenty-five warlike ships, and ten others well man- 
ned, to carry all kind of provision. The ship which carrieth 
the Quene is not painted like unto others, but remaineth very 
black. The whole army will be in readines to depart into 
Spaine within five daies. He understandeth assuredly, that 
the number of the Wallons is encreased, and as he is informed, 
it is sought that they must speake all French. The most 
parte of their souldiers are shott. Monsieur de Boussu is yet 
appointed Admirall of the fleet. Giveth the Quene counsell 
to beware of herself. The Countess of Northumberland 
with the Lord Seton, arrived there at Brugis the 31st of 
August. He is informed for suretie that Prestaull is come 
with the said Lords. If the manner of conveyance of Storie 
had been kept secret in England, or hereafter shall be 
well carried, I think there is, which will hazard to do 
the like enterprise by Prestaull. In the meantime Story 
can informe what practises Prestaull hath in hand for Scot- 
land, him to be the chiefest man of most credit. If any- 
thing be ill intended from hence, it will light in Scotland. 
The chiefest captaines, of the which are busie in practises, is 
Prestaull ; Story was next ; now one Jenny, and Chamber- 
laine ; in Lovain one White. The second of this present. 
Sir Francis Inglefield came hither, and one Nawler, of Suf- 
folke, and Kirkbye did ride to the Countess of Northumber- 
land with letters from these others of their consort. The 
King of Spaine hath bestowed on the Lords and Gentle- 
men of these countries the sum of 70,000 crowns of yearlie 
revenues in land and fee, and 40,000 a yeare shal be given 

* Sir Henry Cobhanr, descended of a very ancient Kentish family, 
was employed in several embassies by Elizabeth. He was a great 
enemy to Sir Francis Walsingham and his party. 



1570.] THE POPE'S BULL AGAINST ELIZABETH. 379 

in recompense unto the Duke of Alva, and his sons, and to 
gentlemen which served in these wars ; and fifteen commen- 
daries shall be given in this country. All this thus bestowed 
the King shall have avancing to his confers of annual rent 
305,000 crowns, besides the donative of six millions to be 
paid in six years, as ransom for the tenth and twenty 
penny they should have payed. The Marks Vitally 
offered to him and Mr. Fitzwilliams to help the restitution 
and accord. He had cawsed the best drawer of pictures 
to draw the Queen of Spaine's picture, which he desires to 
be delivered unto the Queue's Majestic. 



SIR HENRY COBHAM TO CECIL. 

(Spires, Sept, 17, 1570. Abstract.) 

He made relation unto the Emperor of her Majestie's pro 
ceedings in the arrests of late made in the ships, the which the 
Duke of Alva, by King Philip's ambassador resident in Eng- 
land, had done rigorously without just cause. He complains 
of the Pope's Bull,* delivered to a dissolute subject to be set 
up at London publicly. He declared the Pope's pride giving 
out such writings against a Christian Prince, her Majestic 
being lawfully descended to the crown, as a thing dangerous 
to all states. The emperor answered, although he had 
known the arrest well, yet he would hear her Majestie's 
opinion first. He is discontented with the Pope's Bull, and 
he said, that he is advertised that the Pope will call it in 
again. The Emperor uses sharp words against him. He 
delivered her Majestie's letters, which he received with gra- 

* The Pope, to aid and support all the plots of the Catholics against 
Elizabeth, had published a bull, depriving her of the crown, and ab- 
solving her subjects of allegiance, One Falcon was bold enough to 
fix this bull against the gates of the Bishop of London's palace. He 
wr.s afterwards taken and executed, 



380 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 

cious countenance. The Archduke Ferdinand doth by pro- 
curation the ceremonie of marriage for the King of France 
with Elizabeth, a second daughter to the Emperor. An ex- 
presse messenger is sent to the Archduke Charles. It is 
propounded in the Diet to have Hans and Fridericks, the 
Duke of Saxons' sonnes, restored to their father's patrimonie, 
whereof there is good hope. 



RANDOLPH TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

It maye please your Lordship to understande that this 
bearer, Mr. Archibalde Stewarde, is of my olde acquaintance, 
of whose honestie I have suche assurance, that I cannot sum*- 
cientlie commende hym nor his causes to any man with 
whom he has to do. 

I must crave your Lordship's favour for his passeporte to 
the courte, for suche affayres as he hath to do in some causes 
of his owne, agaynst a countrieman of his owne that oweth 
hym a great sum of money, which he hopeth by favour to 
recover, otherwyse it wil be greatly to his damage. This 
I humbly desyre at your Lordship's handes, for that I truste 
he will well deserve anye favor it please your Lordship to 
shewe hym. 

I send your Lordship also a letter from the Lord of Lid- 
dingtoii, sent unto me owte of the castle to be sente unto 
your Lordship. I perceave that all thinges passe by common 
consente betweene them, and that theie are so linked th'one 
with th'other, that what course soever the one runneth the 
other followeth the same, for where within these ten dayes I 
had brought them to verie good passe, I fynd hym now as 
farre off as ever I dyd. 

I have spoken of late with the Lord Lindesaye to knowe at 
what poynt he wolde be at for those Englishemen he hath in 
hande. I fynde that he hathe a greate eye to his owne proffit, 
and yet very desirous to be quy t of them, for the great trouble 



1570.] THE ENGLISH REBELS IN SCOTLAND. 381 

and charge that he is at, but to any resolute point he will not 
grow, more then that he would be gladly quit of them ; he 
would the Queen should well paye for them, and yet would 
have them stand in assurance of their lives, otherwise he 
thinks it a great dishonour to himself to deliver them. 

This is th'effecte of all the talk I had with him, more 
then that he prays me to be a mean that he may be soon 
discharged of them. If your Lordship find it good that I 
shall deal farther with him, I will do as your Lordship shall 
command. 

I have also spoken with the Lord of Loughlevin, who is 
as desirous as the other is to be discharged of his gest,* and 
stands almost in the like terms as the Lord Lindesaye 
doth, desirous to have his life saved, and will be content 
with any consideration for his charges that it may please the 
Quene's Majestic to give, desiring also me to move the same 
to your Lordship, whose case I more pyttie then the other, 
for that I know his state, and how he is charged many ways, 
besides the great loss he had of the Regent's death, his 
brother. I would to God, therefore, that there could be some 
good way taken for him, and that he were relieved of the 
charges that he is at, &c. I send your Lordship a letter 
given unto me by the Regent, written unto him by the Earl 
of Northumberland, who thinks more of the Regent's 
power, or that which he thinks that for old acquaintance 
he may do for him, then that he seeks the readiest way 
to do himself good, which is submission to her Majestic, 
and other means to come by his pardon, then any that 
yet he hath used. The Regent's answer was that there 
wanted no good will to do him good, but that there wanted 
much in himself that had not sought it where it is to be 
had, which is only at the Quene's Majestie's hands, by 
humble submission and acknowledging his offence, and 

* The Earl of Northumberland, who was confined in Lochlevew 
castle. 



382 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [SEPT. 

other meanes that might move her Majestic to be good unto 
hym, untyll which were done, he coulde not do for hym 
as he wolde. This letter his Lordship desyreth to have 
sente unto hym agayne. 

This morning my Lord of Morton and I have talked of 
manie matters, in speciall of the Border men, who have bene 
here ever synce Thursdaye to delyver their pledges as was 
agreed before the Regent. What nowe moveth them to 
fynde so manie delayes as theie do, your Lordship may 
easilye conjecture. The hope of two moneths' respite worketh 
wonders in their heads. This the laste daye that theie muste 
gyve their answer absolutely, either to do it, or to stande at 
their owne adventure. 

I heare owte of Athall that the Lord of Lidington is re- 
moved farther into the countrie, to another place of the Lord 
Athall. It is tolde me that he intendeth to go into Catnes, 
to remayne there with the Earle of Catnes. Upon farther 
knowledge your Lord shall have better assurance. 

lam required from my Lord of Morton to let your Lord- 
ship understande that he hathe delivered his companie of 
soldiers to the Regent, and w T hat otherwise his desire is your 
Lordship knoweth, and dowteth not of your Lordship's good 
will. The Regent also, sore charged, hathe no recourse but 
to your Lordship's helpe. If he discharge any of that small 
number that he hath, dyvers incommodityes may arise ther- 
upon, wherof your Lordship can well consyder, and therm 
truste much upon your Lordship's good will towards hym, 
and favour towards the cause that is nowe in hande. 

Of these matters I leave to deale with your Lordship any 
further at thys tyme, and to ende my letter unto your Lordship 
with the reporte of a strange thing that lately come to my 
hands, wherof I thoughte it my parte to informe your Lord- 
ship before any other, that yet it may be seen and knowen 
what hope there is or lykelihoode of sincere dealing, where 
suche devises are, as by this bearer your Lordship shall re- 
ceave in a boxe, in the which is a token to the Scottish 



1570.] MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 383 

Queen, which, when your Lordship doth behold and read 
the inscription with other devyses about it, your Lordship 
may think that somewhat more is looked for, then that at this 
time all matters shall take an end. The box I have sealed 
with my own scale, two letters are in it also, which I have 
not opened, leaving that to your Lordship, wishing that 
your Lordship should see what is contained in them, or 
otherwise as your Lordship finds good. I would pray 
your Lordship that after you have seen the devise, and read 
the letters, that the whole may be sent unto my Lord of 
Leicester, sealed again under your Lordship's scale, by this 
bearer, as I have written to his Lordship that so it shall be, 
and that he shall so receive it from your Lordship, otherwise 
I shall fail in some part of my promise, whereof I would be 
very loathe. It is known to no man here, that either it is 
come to my sight or shall come to your Lordship, but only 
unto this bearer whom I may sufficiently trust. I will no 
farther trouble your Lordship at this time, though of this 
matter and some other like leading to the same end I have 
enough to write. 

God have your Lordship in his happy keeping, and send 
your Lordship an honourable end of this troublesome doing. 

Humbly I take my leave, the 27th of September, 1570. 
Your honourable Lordship's ever to command, 

THO. RANDOLPHS. 



MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS TO THE BISHOP OF ROSS. 

Reverend father and richt try counsellor, we great you well. 
After that our letters was closet, Robeson arrivit here from 
Scotland, and broached us these others, quhilk for the wrongs 
and extortions we see thereby hes been usit to our faithful 
subjects during this treaty, notwithstanding the promise 
made on all sides of the contrary, we wold not stay for reading 



384 MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. [NOV. 

the haill, to send you the same with diligence, to the effect 
that ye understanding everie thing particularly and at length, 
ye may complayne therapone to the Queue, our gud sister, 
and desyre restitution and recompence for the reif and spoylye 
hes bene made. And seing the King our gud brother makis 
sute at her handes in our favor, that ye shall tell his am- 
bassador how it is not ment bona jftde, as was promesit, de- 
syring him to make instance for recompence as said is, other- 
wise to show how displeasit his maister wil be in sic dealing 
with us. And send us the saide letters and other papers 
agayne, after ye have collectit the principall points out of the 
same. We are advertisit be the Lard of Lochinwar, that he 
has sene sundry letters of th'Erle of Morton, written to dy vers 
of our rebelles, quherin he encourages them with this follow- 
ing, That they tak no thoght of any thing the Quene of 
England promises that they think may be to their disad- 
vantage, for he is assured be her in all he does^ and suppose 
she seme to wishe us restored, she is not myndit to do sa, 
but in dissembling entendis to do nathing for our profeit, 
quhilk ye may shewe to our said gud'sister, praying her that 
we may see and taste the fruites in the contrarye, quhilk we 
have lookit, and yet lookis for, without longer delaye, and 
that she give no credit to the Abbot of Dumfermling's re- 
portis, who ever is in haist only to make feinyet inven- 
tions, wherby she may draw her favor from us. But that she 
consider egally the sore complaynts of the nobillmen our faith- 
full subjects, and make them be recompensit for the wronges 
they have susteynit, with greater suretie in tymes cuming. 
And thus referring the rest to your wisdome, we commit you to 
God. 

At Chattisworth, the 21st day of November, 1570. 

Your richt good frend and mestres, 

MARIE R. 

Give remeyd be not put to theis wronges, it semes no 
good to follow, for I think this handling by the Queue's 



1570.] ELIZABETH AND THE DUKE OF ANJOU. 385 

command should make her to treat with us, and leve our 
rebels, or help us against them.* 



SIR F. WALSINGHAMf TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER. 

Your Lordship's of the 26th of January, I received the 3rd 
of February, by the which I perceive the matter your Lord 
ship and I talked of hath bred some speech here with you, 
and here the matter passes not with great silence, but is taken 
to be much more forward than I perceive it is ; I mean 
amongst the common sort. As far as I can learn, there 
will be no further overture made of this matter than already 
is, for here they stand upon their reputation, and therefore 
would be loath to move speech unless they were in full hope 
of speed. The experience of others that have heretofore at- 
tempted the like matter, makes them more doubtful how to 
proceed. In my poor opinion, the commodities or discommo- 
ditties, for taking or refusing, may easily be scene, and therefore 
when they are once weighed, a speedy resolution were best 
to cut off many inconveniences, that delay of them commonly 
brings. By my last of the 27th of January I made your 
Lordship acquainted with my opinion so far forth as I 
could inform myself, using such circumspections in that 
behalf, as is fit for me, considering the jealousy already con- 
ceived of me. But when I shall be further informed, T will 
not fail further to advertise your Lordship. And so for this 

* The postscript is entirely in Mary's own hand. 

*r Sir Francis Walsingham was the youngest son of William Wal- 
singham, of Scadbury, in Norfolk, and was one of Elizabeth's ablest 
ministers. He was now sent ambassador to France to treat of 
the marriage of Elizabeth with the Duke of Anjou, which is the 
" matter" spoken of at the beginning of the present letter. This 
match, like all the others, broke upon the article of religion. Soon 
after Walsingham's return, in 157 S, he was made first secretary of 
state. He was in Paris at the infamous massacre of St. Bartho- 
lomew. 

VOL. I. C C 



386 POPISH CONSPIRACY AGAINST ENGLAND. [FEB. 

time, having no leasure to write any more at large, I most 
humbly take my leave. 

From Parris, the 3rd of Februarie, 1570. 

Your Lordship's to command. 

FRAUNCIS WALSINGHAM. 



WALSINGHAM TO CECIL. 

(Extract.) 

As I was in writing, one by whom my predecessor Sir 
Henry Norris had his best intelligence, repaired secretly to 
me, and told me this newes following. 

How that the enterprise of Ireland is of great consequence 
and danger, whereof though he thought the King was not 
privye, yet he did assure me that the faction of Guise were 
dealers in it. 

Further he said that the Pope's Nuntio laboured what he 
might to draw Monsieur* into the practise, promising him 
for the maintenance thereof to be paid in Parris for his en- 
couragement one hundred thousand crowns : he made no 
difficulty to bring the said enterprise to passe, in respect of 
the great intelligence they have both in England and Ireland, 
and that the same being won, it would be an easie steppe to 
a steppe of more consequence, meaning England. 

Lastly, he shewed me that if they would not accept this 
enterprise, notwithstanding it was resolved that it should yet 
go forward, and that the bills of creditt for the said sum of 
one hundred thousand crowns are alreadie here. If this adver- 
tisement prove as true as other that here before hath been 
given by him to my predecessor, then are they not to be 
neglected. By another means I was advertised that Stukeley f 

* The Duke of Anjou. 

f Stukeley, whom we last left in Ireland, had aspired to the Steward- 
ship of Wexford, but being disappointed, he quitted his allegiance to 
the Queen, and repaired to the Court of Spain, where he gained credit 
by his large promises of delivering Ireland into the hands of the 



1571.] POPISH CONSPIRACY AGAINST ENGLAND. 387 

in Spain presented an instrument unto the King there, not 
only subscribed with the names of the most part of the Irish 
nobility, but also the names of divers in England, of good 
quality, ready to be at his devotion. I learned further, that 
of late, since the Lord Seton's coming hither, there hath been 
some greater conference between the Spanish ambassador and 
the ambassador of Scotland than beforetyme was accustomed. 

Farther I learn, that the greater part of those that are 
landed in Ireland, were levied by the Earl of Argille in the 
King of Spaine's name, within the said Earl's government, 
being promised pay by the said King of Spain's ministers. 
They were embarked at the mule or straight of Qu in tire. 

One Skeleton, an ordinary servant of the Queen of Scots, 
arrived lately here with letters of some importance, as it is 
thought, for that oftentimes he had access to the court. 

Thus having made your Honour privy e of all such things 
as I could learn, I most humbly take my leave. At Paris, 
the 8th of February, 1570. 



THE QUEEN TO WALSINGHAM. 

(February 11, 1570. Extract.) 

We have by the last letters of the Duke* understood in 
express words, that he himself is earnestly disposed to do 
anything that may maintain the amity that is between the 
King and us, and particularly that he hath attended to have 
restitution made, as our marshalls on both sides have thought 

Spanish King. Stukeley was highly honoured and pensioned by the 
King, and preparations were making for an expedition to Ireland, 
which gave much uneasiness to Elizabeth's ministers, but by degrees 
the King seems to have been somewhat disabused of his confidence in 
this adventurer, and his preparations were delayed by other affairs. 
Much curious information on Stukeley's proceedings in Spain this year 
will be found in Digges' Complete Ambassador. 
* The Duke of Alva. 

c 2 



388 STUKELEY IN SPAIN. [FEB. 

meete, and meaneth to send over some speciall person of 
creditt, to explain some small difficulties rising thereof, and 
to put the whole in execution. These kinds of dealings and 
offers, you may say, are very agreeable to us, who by manie 
meanes made appear that the late differences have not growne 
of us, nor as we think of the King's owne disposition, but by 
untowardnes of ministers. And now whilst we are well con- 
tent therewith, we are sorry to think that certain reports which 
we hear out of Spaine should be true, either in the whole or 
in part, and as we would be gladdest they are false, so are 
we desirous that we might know them certainly from the 
King to be false. And you shall say because we have seen some 
sure proof of that ambassador's good disposition to conserve 
the amity betwixt the King his master and us, wherein he is 
much to be commended, and that he may with more expedition 
and readiness by the way of Fraunce certify the King and pro- 
cure some answer, than he may conveniently any other ways, 
you shall say that we thought meete to impart these speeches 
which we so mislike as being altogether so contrary to that 
which we do conceive of the King's good will, and of those 
late friendly offices of the Duke of Alva, praying him not 
only to shew you his opinion thereof, but also to advertise 
the King and procure us some answer. 

We have heard and knowne it to be true, that certain 
savage rebells, being men of no valour, had fled out of our 
realme of Ireland into Spaine, and to cover their lewdness, 
and procure both reliefe for themselves and for such like as 
they are in Ireland, they do pretend their departure out of the 
land for matter of religion, where indeed they be neither of 
one nor other religion, but given to beastiality, and yet 
have they writt enough to shewe hypocrisy for their purpose. 
Since the first arrival of some of these, we knowe also that 
an Englishman, a subject of ours, named Stewckley, not un- 
knowne (as we think) for his former prodigall life, both in 
Spaine, and other places, and notwithstanding great favour 
shewn unto him divers tymes upon hope of amendment, and 



1571.] STUKELEY IN SPAIN. 3N9 

some tokens of his repentance, he did this last summer, pre- 
tending to come out of Ireland hither, suddenly turn his 
course into Spain, and as we hear hath lighted into the 
company of the foresaid fugitives and rebels, pretending by 
his superfluous expenses, which is altogether of other men's 
goods, to be a person of some quality and estimation, and 
able to do some great thing in Ireland, whereas he has not 
the value of a marmaduke in land, or livelihood, he hath so 
solicited the King, or some about him, with vain motions, 
as it is by him bruited, and otherwise also with some creditt 
reported unto us, which yet we do not believe, that the King 
will send a Captain of his, such a one as Julian Romero,* 
or such like, with a number of soldiers into Ireland to follow 
some vain device of those rebels. Whereof we cannot but 
marvel that the King or any of his counsel, being of ex- 
perience, can so lightly give any creditt to such a companion 
as Stewkley is, who could never live long in any quiet con- 
dition at home, of whom we are not disposed to say much, 
because we cannot say any good of him, but may say, it 
shall be sufficient that his conditions may only be enquired 
of, then we doubt not whosoever shall know that will take 
heed how to adventure any thing with him. And yet what- 
soever he is, we cannot but find it strange that either 
he or any such fugitives moving matters of attempt as 
rebels should either be allowed or hearkened unto, for what- 
soever hath been conceived that any person of any degree, 
being the King of Spaine's subjects, coming into our realm 
of late years, as many have done for safe tie of their lives for 
matters of their consciences, (as we always understood,) yet 
we do assure this of our honour, that there was never per- 
son of any degree, that did motion unto us any matter offen- 
sive to the King or to his Low Countries, when opportunities 
served for such purposes, that was ever allowed by us, or 
any such motion, or that ever received reward, or comfort 

* Julian Romero was the captain appointed by the King of Spain to 
attend Stukelcy into Ireland. 



390 STATE OF IRELAND. [MARCH, 

therein, but was rejected. Such hath been our sinceritie in 
these tymes, not to give any comfort to the hurt of the 
King or of his countries ; and now, if these reports which 
we heare should be true, we might think ourselves evil 
recompensed, and should be provoked for our defence to use 
such meanes as otherwise of ourselves we did never allow or 
like. 



LORD BURGHLEY TO NICHOLAS WHITE. 

Mr. Whyte, I do the more hartily thank you for your letter 
sent me by this bearer, my Lord of Ormond's servant, because 
otherwise I had not before that tyme heard of your health 
and estate ; and for that no other thyng is to be committed to 
letters, that shall be carry ed so far, but that which may en- 
dure any wynds, I will not occupy this my letter with any 
matter of doubtfull interpretation, and therefor I hartily com- 
mend me and my good will to be ready allwais to pleasure 
you, whylest I thynk you honest, and carefull for the service 
of the Quene and your countrey. 

I wish you had good occasion to be spared from thence 
awhile, but I doubt your countrey people are over busy to 
occupy there all good servants to withstand the attempt of 
the evill. 

Sorry am I to see that countrey not to go forward in peace, 
but rather to go backward, and to be a loathsome chardg to 
this crown.* Pene mihi nauseum movit ista profusio et in- 
utilis inanitio Jisci regii. God send some stay ! and so 
with my wyve's commendation, I end. At Grenwych, 14 
March, 1570. 

Yours, not changed in frendshipp, though in name,t and 

* He alludes to the attempted rebellion of O'Brien Earl of Thomond. 
t Cecil was created Baron Burghley, on the 25th of February pre- 
ceding. 



1571.] STTKELEY IN SPAIN. 391 

yet that not unknown to you when you were with me ne'er 
Stamford. 

W. BURGHLEY, 

My stile is, Lord of Burghley, if you mean to know it, for 
your writing, and if you list to write truly, the poorest Lord 
in England.* Commend me to your Chief Baron, Mr. Dillon. 



THE COUNTESS OF NORTHUMBERLAND TO SIR THOMAS 
STUKELEY. 

For that I do not hear that you have yet taken your journey 
eastwards,f as you were determined, I will hope that you 
shall otherwise be more readily employed to the benefit of 
your country and your own worthy desire, and therefore 
thought good to send you these few lines to advertise you 
how ready I am to do myself, and to procure others, as I am 
able, to do anything you shall think metest for the benefit 
and advancement of your zeal and laudable enterprise, as 
more at large I have signified to the Duchess,f her noble 
Grace, who (I do assure me) will impart the same with you, 
to whose Grace not you only, but we all and our whole 
nation stand so deeply bound, as we may dewly acknow- 
ledge her to be sent of God, especially provided to be in that 
place, as another Joseph to relieve the miseries of her 
country, and to be a patroness for us all that do endure. 

I have long since sent my letters to Rome to mete with 
you there, and therein have fully answered the requests of 
your former letters, as by the same you shall fully perceive, 

* In fact, somewhere about this time we read of his being obliged 
to sell some of his smaller offices. 

f Stukeley was still in Spain, but was preparing to go to Rome, to 
lay his project of conquering Ireland before the Pope. He was 
knighted by the King of Spain. 

J The Duchess of Feria. 



392 NORFOLK'S CONSPIRACY. [JUNE, 

if your determination thither do holde. Th'Erle,* the Lord 
Dacre, and all the rest of the gentlemen, send you their most 
effectual commendations, wishing you good speede in all 
your attempts. From Meklyn, this 21st of June, 1571. 
Your frende, as you know, most assured for ever, 

A. NORTHUMBERLAND. 

I beseeche you, good Sir Thomas, to be the meane to pro- 
cure for me the pictures of the Duke and Duches of Feria 
their Graces, and of my Lord Don Laurence, wherin you 
shall do me suche a pleasure as I shall stande bound to you 
for ever, to acknowledge it to the lull, if ever it lye in my 
power. 



LORD BURGHLEY TO SIR RALPH SADLER, SIR THOMAS 
SMITH, OR DR. WILSON.f 

Sir, I have receaved this paper included out of Ireland, 
which I send you by the Queue's Majesty's commandment, to 
be consydered by you ; and the party named, John Synclar,| 

* Of Westmoreland. 

t In the course of this year was discovered the fearful train of con- 
spiracies which the Papists had been so long plotting against the 
Queen's life and the protestant government, by the seizure of a 
packet of letters on a foreigner, who was employed by some of the 
conspirators. It was found that one Ridolphi, a Florentine, who was 
commissioned by the Pope into England " to sow sedition," and the 
Bishop of Ross, for his mistress the Queen of Scots, were the most 
active agents. Some of the Privy Council were at the Tower both day 
and night to examine different persons who were seized on the in- 
formations of others, and the further the examinations were pursued, 
the more serious they appeared. The Duke of Norfolk, who had 
never ceased his secret practices, was again committed to the Tower, 
was unanimously condemned t>y his peers of high treason, and was 
in the year following brought to the scaffold. The Bishop of Ross, 
also, was committed to custody. 

J The gardener of the Duke of Norfolk. See the Examinations in 
Murdin, p. 90, 102. 



1571.] REGENT OF SCOTLAND SLAIN. 393 

is to be enquired for, and to be apprehended, for the causes 
expressed in the writing. 

I thynk some things untruly reported, specially that of 
Sir H. Nevill.* This night, about twelve of the clock, I 
received your letter, with a letter there included to the 
Quene's Majesty, who is not stirring, and therefore I can 
write nothing at this time. 

I pray you commend me to Sir R. Sadler. From Lees,t 
this 8th of September, 1671, above nine of the clock. 

I hear the Regent in Scotland is slain by a stratagem 
in this sort : On Monday last, two hundred and forty horse 
men, a hundred footmen, all of the castle of Edenborough, 
stale to Sterling town, which they entered quietly and took 
the Regent and all the Lords of his present, in their beds, 
and when they were carrying them away, their soldiers fell 
to spoil, and a power of the castle of Stirling issuing out, 
rescued them all, and slew their takers, but in this fight 
the Regent was hurt, and by some advertisements I hear 
that he is dead.J Let Mr. Sadler know hereof, but otherwise 
disperse it not, lest it be not true that he is dead, and I wold 
have no linolledg come to Lady Lenox, before she shall have 
it from the Quene's Majesty. 

Yours assuredly, 

W. BURGHLEY. 

* Some of the evidence seemed to involve Sir Henry Nevill. 

t The splendid mansion of Lord Rich, in Essex. The Queen was 
now on a progress in Essex, in the course of which she visited Audley 
End, Horeham Hall, Mark Hall, and Lees. 

+ <e It is true that the Erie of Lenox, late Regent, was slain after 
that he was taken, by commandment of Claud Hamilton, and he that 
killed hym named Calder, who hath confessed it. The Erie of Marr 
is confirm! Regent by parlement at Sterling, whereto the Erles of 
Argile, Eglinton, Cassells, and Crawford, with the Lords Boyd and St. 
Colme, have sworne and subscribed." -*-Burghley to the Earl of Shrews- 
bury, Sept. 13, in Lodge. 



394 MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. [SEPT. 



EARL OF SHREWSBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY.J 

After my most hearty commendations unto your good Lord- 
ship, this Queen's answer may appeare to you in my letters 
no we unto the Quene's Majestic. She shewed herself exceed- 
ing sorowfull when she heard that some of her servants 
should be removed from her, and semed to dispayre of the 
continuance of her life, but respecting my duty, without credit 
to her words, I applyed myself to take order in despaching 
away her servants above the number appoynted, and driven I 
was to name them that should remaine about her. But those 
that I named would have departed with the rest also, if I 
would have suffered them, upon policie to have the other still 
to remaine with them, alledging that they would not nor 
could not serve without them, insomuch as I have had more 

* The examinations of persons concerned in the plot, and the secret 
correspondence which had, by different means, fallen into the hands 
of the government, implicated the Queen of Scots so deeply, and laid 
open such an extensive and dangerous series of intrigues and treason- 
able practices, that it was thought right to put her under further re- 
straint, and to reduce the number of her servants. The Earl of Shrews- 
bury was also ordered, for the time, to stop all communication with 
her, and to seize upon all letters or messengers that might be sent to 
her. The answer of Lord Burghley to this letter, dated September 13, 
is printed in Lodge, ii. 57. He says, " The Quene's Majesty hath 
willed me to advertise you that she had found a very dangerous at- 
tempt intended by the Quene of Scotts, and the Duke of Norfolk 
to be privie therof ; who hath made a very lamentable submission to 
her Majesty, with a request for her mercy ; but I see her Majesty 
entered into a great indignation agaynst hym. Her Majesty wold 
have you also to continue her former direction, and to dispatch 
away the number that are separated from her as they shall desyre 
passport ; and for such as shall desyre to pass into France, to give 
them passport to come to London, and from thence to the court ; and 
for such as will return into Scotland, to gyve them direction to pass by 
one of the wardens ; and for the Lord Levynston and his wyfe, to use 
them favorably, that they may at their commodity depart where they 
shall desyre. As for Robynson, her Majesty would have you direct 
hym to Scotland." 



1571.] FURTHER RESTRAINT OF MARY. 395 

trouble this daye in that matter then ever I had in one daye. 
These ten persons I thought good to stay till the Quene's 
Majestie's pleasure be knowne of them, partly for that they 
dare not for danger of their lives passe into Scotland. 

The Lord Leviston also, though I named him to tarry 
about her, mynding to departe hence, desired to repayre up 
unto the courte, which I utterly denyed, but stay hym untill 
her Majestie's pleasure be knowen, and so doth he remayne 
here expecting the same. At the writing hereof, Robinson 
came hither, with letters and pacquets from the Bishop of 
Rosse and the French ambassador, all which I do herewith 
send unto your Lordship, and have committed Robinson in 
sure keeping, without conference, untill I heare from your 
Lordship, which I desire may be with speede. I thank your 
Lordship most heartely for your frendly answer touching the 
vaine person that said I offered to shewe him this Quene. 
The reporte of me herein was utterly false, arid therfore it 
might well be such a glorious foole, that for his owne prayse 
boasted more favor of me in that case then ever I shewed to 
any. 

The Lady Leviston remaineth still sick here, as she hath 
bene this eight weeks, not able to travell. I desire to know 
her Majestie's pleasure of her, for she is out of the number 
appointed, because she meaneth to departe hence so sone as 
she is able to travell. Thus for this present I committ your 
Lordship to the Allmighty. From Sheffield, * this 9th of 
September, 1571. 

Your good Lordship's ever assured, 

G. SHREWSBURY, 

* The Queen of Scots had been removed from Tutbury to Sheffield 
Castle, in the August of 1569. 



300 MARY CONCERNED IN THE CONSPIRACY. [SEPT. 

THE EARL OF SHREWSBURY TO QUEEN ELIZABETH. 

It may please your most excellent Majestic to understande, 
that according to your Highnes's letters of the 5th of this 
instant, I have declared unto the Quene of Scotts the disco- 
very of unlawful intelligence and practises betwene the Duke 
of Norfolk and her, and of her deliberation for escape ; and 
that the very cause of your Majestic' s offence is in that your 
Highnes understands her labors and devises to stirre up a 
newe rebellion in this realme, and to have the King of Spayrie 
to assist it. She answered, that as for the Duke, he hathe to 
answer for his own doings. " I have not," saythe she, 
" delte with him synce the tyme of his restrainte, nor used 
any moyaunce unto him, neither have I gone about to styrre up 
a rebellion in this realme, nor intended any harme unto the 
Quene, or any her subjects ; * although," sayth she, " the 
Quene hath mayntained my rebels against me, to the taking 
away of my crowne from my head." Thus by her words she 
thought to seme cleare, thoughe her dedes are discovered to 
the contrary. But urging my former sayings to be certainly 
trewe, I said, that seeing she had so used herself, your Ma- 
jestie had juste cause to alter your courteous dealing, as well 
in restrayning her libertie, as also in taking away such num- 
ber of persons from her as are mete rather for practice then 
for service necessary, and told her rowndly, therefore, that all 
above the nomber of ten persons must depart from her, and 
that with spede. At this she was excedinglie troubled, 
weping and sorrowing, and said that nowe she loked shortely 
that her life shuld end, " for thus dothe the Quene use me," 
saith she, " to that purpose ; yet I desire," saith she, " that 
some good, learned man may be with me before my death to 

V 

* Mary was not at all aware of the extent of the discoveries which 
had been made, and the Earl of Shrewsbury had, according to his di- 
rections, studiously kept her ignorant of them. He knew well that 
this declaration of the Scottish Queen was utterly false. 



1571.] FURTHER RESTRAINT OF MARY. 397 

comfort and stay my conscience, being a Christian woman, 
and the world shal know," said she, " that I died a trewe 
Prince, and in the Catholike faithe that I professe." I said 
unto her, that she had no cause to use any such words, nor 
to think any evill of your Majestie, that had alwais so courte- 
ouslie dealte with her above her deserts. And I called then 
ernestlie for her checke rolle,* and demanded whom she 
wold choose to the said number to attend on her. She an- 
swered, for any thing that I could do, that she wold name 
none. " Let the Quene," saithe she, " do with me what she 
will." Then I named them myself, bothe men and women, 
mentioned in this schedule, and have taken order for despach- 
ing away the rest, according to your Highnes' commande- 
ment, saving some that I have stayed in safe keping, untill 
your Majestie' s pleasure be further knowen, which I do hum- 
bly desire your Majestie to knowe. 

I have surelie ordered that neither she, nor any attendant 
on her, shal departe out of these my gates, untill your Ma- 
jestie shal otherwise commande me ; neither can any devises 
or practises be used in bringing or sending any intelligence 
to any of them, but I trust and am assured the same shal be 
met withall ; suche order have I given streightly to be kept 
every respect. Whereunto, notwithstanding, I shal not faile 
to applie my daily studie and care according to my dutie. 
Thus trusting that your Majestie woll please to take these 
my doings in good part, I beseech Almighty God to preserve 
your Highnes eternally. From Shefeld Castle, this 9th of 
September, 1571. 

Your Majestie' s most humble servant, 

and obedient subject, 

G. SHREWSBURY. 

* A copy of which check-roll is given in Lodge, ii. 52. 



398 THE EARL OF MARK MADE REGENT. [SEPT. 

LORD BURGHLEY TO SIR THOMAS SMITH AND DR. WILSON. 

Sir, the Queue's Majesty hath commanded me to will you 
to speak with Charles * in the Tower, and newly to examyne 
hym of the letters that Rydolfi caused hym to wryte to the 
Bishop of Rosse and others, and to express the contents 
therof, and to sett down the alphabettf of the same. 

I do return to you Barkar'sJ examynations, dowting lest 
the lack of them might hynder the service you have in hand. 

The Quene's Majesty thynketh that you have heretofore 
stayed in surety all the Duke's wrytings at his house. It is 
ment that all his houses shall be visited and his goods in- 
ventoryed. 

The Earle of Marr is made Regent by Parlement. The 
Erie of Lennox was slayn by one Calder, at the commande- 
ment of Claude Hamilton, and all the King's party have 
sworn in parlement to reveng it, for which purpose they 
assemble their whole forces to be at Leth the 2nd October ; 
and so wishing your return, 

Yours assuredly, 

16 Sept. 1571. W. BURGHLEY. 



LORD BURGHLEY TO SIR THOMAS SMITH.$ 

Sir, your letter dated yesterday came to me, even now 
almost 9 of the clock, so as fynding that you and Mr. Wilson 
meane to tarry there but untyll noone, I see it superfluous to 
wryte anythyng unto you, and though I wold, yet at this 

* Charles Bailly, a Fleming, the seizure of whom led to the dis- 
covery of the plot. He had been employed by the Queen of Scots 
and Ridolphi to carry secret letters. 

t The cypher. 

{ The examinations of William Barker are given in Murdin, p. 87. 

Addressed to Sir Thomas Smith, " at St. Catharyns by the 
Tower." 



1571.] NORFOLK'S CONSPIRACY. 399 

present her Majesty is not to be spoken withall, for that her 
chamber doore is not open. She was yesternight very in- 
quisitive what was written or sent by you. I told her con- 
sydering you could not deale with the party before yesterday, 
being Sondaye, it wold be this daye before you could certify 
anything. I thynk her Majesty will be very desirous to heare 
of the contents of the little cipher, and in my opinion that 
other is the Bishop of Rosse's.* If this letter come to you 
before you come to London, you may tarry, and yet send 
hyther some more knolledg, for it is lykely that her Majesty 
will have you spekewith the Duke. 3rd Sept. 1571. 
Yours assuredly, 

W. BURGHLEY. 

I miss the paper booke for Capt. Maltby. 

* The Bishop of Ross, seeing every thing discovered beyond his ex- 
pectation, and being in personal danger, for he was closely imprisoned, 
and it had been decided that he might be proceeded against as a sub- 
ject for high treason, fell faint-hearted, avowed himself penitent for his 
evil practices, and made some important confessions, at which his mis- 
tress seems to have been much disconcerted, and enraged against him. 
Many of his confessions, which are well worth reading, are printed in 
Murdin. " The byshoppe seemeth to me/' says Dr. Wilson to Lord 
Burghley, (Nov. 8, in Murdin, p. 57,) "to be verie gladde that these 
practyses are come to light, saying they are all naught, and he hopeth 
that when folke will leave to be lewde, his mystresse shall speed the 
better. He saythe farther, upon speech that I had with hym, that the 
Quene his mystresse is not fit for any housebande ; for first he saythe, 
she poysoned her housebande the French Kinge, as he hath credibly 
understoode ; agayne, she hath consented to the murder of her late 
housebande the Lord of Darnley ; thyrdly, she matched with the 
murderer, and brought him to the field to be murdered; and last of 
all, she pretended marriage with the Duke, with whom, as he thynketh, 
she would not longe have kepte fayth, and the Duke should not have 
had the best dayes with her. Lord, what people are these, what a Quene, 
and what an ambassador /" 



400 COUNTESS OF WESTMORELAND. [OCT. 



COUNTESS OF WESTMORELAND* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

As I am bound, I give your Lordship most humble thankes 
for my poor husband, whom your careftill frendship alwayes 
seketh to bryng to better estate, although it semeth that hys 
own cruell fortune repugneth all good meanes and endeavours 
that may be used to do hym good. For myn own part, I 
heard not of hym a long tyme, and, which grieves me not a 
lyttle, I feare he hath not received my last letter, because he 
maketh no answer ; but I beseche your Lordship most humbly 
to continue your goodnesse, trusting in the ende a more happy 
effect may followe. 

I have also most humbly to thank your Lordship for your 
continuall goodnes to myselfe, and for the lease of the parkes 
at Branspethe, it pleased you to procure me at the Queue's 
Majesty's hand. Yet I am forced, although I be very loathe 
so often to trouble your Lordship, to be a suter to you that 
my lease in one poynt may be amended, which is thys, that 
the Quene's Majesty hath there graunted it to me no longer 
then it please her to kepe it in her own handes ; so that if 
either herselfe or successours shall either give it or sell it, 
my lease is of no valewe. In consideration w^herof, I beseche 
your Lordship to shewe me so much favour as I may have a 
newe lease graunted for twenty yeres, in such sort as I may 
enjoye it quietly howsoever her Majesty bestow the land, 
and that it may passe in the name of this bearer, my servant, 
John Emerson. Thus leaving to trouble your Lordship, I 
end, remayning your poore frend, and wyshing all good hap 
to your Lordship and all yours. From Fremingham, this 
10th of October. 

Your Lordship's most bound during lyfe, 

J. WESTMORELAND. 

* This letter, and the one printed at p. 391, contrast strongly the 
different characters of the ladies of the two rebel Earls. 



1571.] MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. 401 



THE EARL OF SHREWSBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, after I had depeched this bearer, 
this Quene make eftesones great complaynte unto me of her 
sickly estate, and that she loked verily to perishe therby, 
and used diverse melancholy words, that it is ment it should 
so come to passe with out helpe of medicine, and all because I 
was not ready to send up her phisician's letters unto you. 
Which indede I refused, for that I perceived her principall 
drifte was and is to have some libertie out of these gates, 
which in no wise I will consent unto, because I see no small 
perill therin. 

Notwithstanding, leste she should think that the Queue's 
Majestic had commanded me to denye her suche reasonable 
meanes as might save her life, by order of phisick, I thought 
it not amisse, uppon her said complaynt and instance, to 
send up the said letters here inclosed, to be considered on as 
shall stand with the Quene's Majestic' s pleasure. But truly 
I wold be very loathe that any libertie or exercise should be 
graunted unto her, or any of hers, out of these gates, for feare of 
many daungers nedeles to be remembered unto you. I do 
suffer her to walke upon the leades here in open ayre, in my 
large dyning chamber, and also in this court yard, so as bothe 
I myself or my wife be allwaise in her company, for avoyding 
all others' talk either to herself or any of hers. And sure 
watche is kept within and without the walles, bothe night and 
day, and shall so contynewe, God willing, so long as I shall 
have the charge. Thus I commit your good Lordship 
unto God. From Shefeld Castle, this 12th of December, 
1571. 

I cannot perceyve that she is in any present perill of sick- 
nes. If any ensue I will not faile to advertise the same unto 
your Lordship with all diligence, but I must here eftesones 

VOL. I. D D 






402 NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. [JAN. 

advertyse your Lordship that I am utterly against any further 
libertie unto her. 

Your Lordship's ever assured, 

G. SHREWSBURY. 



THE DUKE OF NORFOLK TO HIS CHILDREN. * 

Deare children, this is the last letter that ever I thinke to 
write to you, and therefore if you loved me, or that you will 
seeme gratefull to me for the speciall love that I have ever 
borne unto you, then remember and follow these my last 
lessons. O Philip,t serve and feare God above all thinges, 
I finde the fault in myselfe that I have, God forgive me, been 
negligent in this poynte. Love and make much of your wife, 
and therin, considering the great adversity you are now in, 

* Superscribed, " To my loving children, specially to Phillip and 
Nan." Sentence was pronounced upon the Duke on the 16th of 
January, but it was not executed till the second of June. The follow- 
ing memorial, written before his death, and printed by Murdin, may il- 
lustrate some things in the present letter. 

Gifts to my friends : 

To my Lord Keper, the crystall cuppe with stones. 

To my Lord of Sussex, my best george, chaine, and garter. 

To my Lord of Leycester, my shyp crystall glasses. 

To my Lord Burley, a piece of clothe of gold, and a rubye ryng. 

To Sir Walter Myldmaye, my trunke crystall glasse, and the other 
of byrall, trymmed with golde, and my gold spons, with pearle. 

Nothyng to be done, neither by my children nor servants, without 
my Lord Burley 's pryvitie. 

I desyre that Nane and Mege myght continue together. 

So lykewise my three sonnes, till years alter the course of their 
life. 

And if it might be, that Mall and little Besse were also kept 
together. 

Twenty pound a yeareto be allowed to Mr. Fox," 

t Philip was the Duke's eldest son by his first wife, Mary, daughter 
of Henry Fitzwilliam, Earl of Arundel, which title he inherited by 
right of his mother. 



1572.] NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. 403 

by reason of my fall, is your greatest present comfort and re- 
liefe, besides your happines in having a wife which is en- 
dued with so great towardnes in resolve and good qualities, 
and in person comparable with the best sorte. Followe these 
two lessons, and God will bless you, and without these, as 
you may see by divers examples out of the scripture, and also 
by ordinary worldly proofe, where God is not feared all 
goeth to wracke, and where love is not between the husband 
and the wife, there God doth not prosper. 

My third lesson is, that you shew yourselfe loving and na- 
tural to your brothers and sisters and sisters-in-lawe. Though 
you be very young in years, yet you must strive with con- 
sideration to become a man, for it is your own presence and 
good government of yourselfe that must get friends. And if you 
take that course, then have I been so carefull a father unto you, 
as I have taken such order as you, by God's grace, shall be well 
able, besides your wife's lands, to maintayne yourselfe like a 
gentleman. Marry, the world is greedy and covetous, and if the 
showe of the well government of yourselfe do not feare and re- 
strayne theyr greedy appetite, it is like that by undirect means 
they will eyther put you from that which lawe layeth upon 
you, or else dryve you to much trouble in trying and holding 
your right. When my grandfather dyed I was not much 
above a yeare older then you are now, and yet I thanke God I 
tooke such order with my selfe, as you shall reap the commodity 
of my so longe passed travell, if you do now imitate the like. 
Helpe to strengthen your younge and rawe years with good 
counsell. I send you herewith a brief schedule whom I wish 
you to make account of as friends, and whom as servants. 
And I charge you as a father may do, to follow my direction 
therein : my experience can better tell what is fitt for you, 
then yet your younge years can judge. 

I would wish you for the present to make your chiefe abode 
at Cambridge, which is the place fittest for you to prosecute 
your learning in, and besides is not very fair hence, whereby 
you may within a daye's warning be here to followe your own 

D n2 



404 NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. [JAN. 

causes, as occasion serveth. If after a year or two you 
spend your tyme in some house of the law, there is nothing 
that will prove more to your commodity, considering how 
for the tyme you shall have continuall business about your 
owne lawe affairs ; and thereby also, if you spend your tyme 
well, you shall be ever after better able to judge in your owne 
causes. I too late repent that I followed not this course that 
now I wish to you, for if I had, then my case perchance had 
not been in so ill state as now it is. 

When God shall send you to those years as that it shall be 
fitt for you to company with your wife, (which I had rather 
were sooner, then that by ill company you should fall into 
any iU rule,) then I would wish you to withdrawe yourselfe 
into some private dwelling of your owne. And if your happ 
may be so good, as you may so lyve without being called to 
higher degree, O Philip ! Philip ! then shall you enjoy e that 
blessed life, which your wofull father would faine ha' done, 
and never could be so happye. Beware of high degrees ! To 
a vaineglorious proud stomacke it seemeth at the first sweet, 
Looke into all chronicles and you shall finde that in the end 
it bringes heapes of cares, toyles in the state, and most com- 
monly in the end utter overthrowe. Looke into the whole 
state of the nobility in tymes past, and into theyr state now r , 
and then judge whether my lesson be trew or not. 

Assure yourselfe, as you may see by the bookes of my ac- 
counts, and you shall finde that my living did hardly main- 
tayne my expences, for all the helpe that I had by Tom's 
landes, and somewhat by your wive's and sisters-in-lawe, but 
that I was never a beggar. You shall, by the grace of God, 
be a great deale richer and quyeter in your low degree, where- 
in once againe I wish you to continue. They may, that shall 
wish you the contrary, have a good meaning, but believe your 
father, who of love wishes you best, and with the mynde that 
he is at present fully armed to God, who sees both states, 
high and lowe, as it were even before his eyes. 

Beware of the court, except it be to do your prince service, 



1572.] NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. 405 

and that as neare as you can in the meanest degree : for place 
hath no certainty, eyther a man by following thereof hath too 
much to worldly pompe, which in the end throwes him downe 
headlong, or else he lyeth there unsatisfyed, eyther that he 
cannot attaine to himself that he would, or else that he can- 
not do for his friends as his heart desireth. 

Remember these notes and follow them, and then you, by 
God's helpe, shall reape the commodity of them in your old 
years ; when you, if it be his will, may give the like advice to 
your owne. If your brothers may be suffered to remain in 
your company, still I would be most gladd thereof, because 
continuing still together should still increase love between 
you. But the world is so catching of every thing that falls, 
as I believe Tom being after my death the Queue's Ma- 
jesty's ward, shall be begged by one or another. But yet you 
are sure to have your brother William left still with you, be- 
cause, poore boy, he hath nothing to feed cormorants withall, 
to whom you will as well be a father as a brother, for, upon my 
blessing, I committ him to your charge to provide for, if that 
which I have assured him by lawe shall not be so sufficient 
as I meant it. If lawe may take place, your sisters-in-lawe be 
surely enough conveyed to the behoofe of your brothers, and 
then I would wish them to be brought up with some friend 
of myne, as for the present I allowe best of Sir Christopher 
Heydon, if he will so much friend you as to receyve them to 
sojourne with him, if not, then in some other place as your 
friendes shall best allow of. 

And touching the bestowing of your wife and Meggy, who 
I would be loath should be out of your wive's company, (for 
as she should be a good companion for Nan, so I committ 
Megg of speciall trust to her,) I thinke good till you lye to- 
gether, if my Lady of Sussex might be entreated to take them 
to her as sojourners, there were no place so fitt considering 
his kindred unto you, and the assured friend that I hope you 
shall finde of him ; besides she is a good Lady. If it will not 
be so brought to pass, then, by the advice of your friends, 



406 NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. [JAN. 

take some other order, but in no case would I wish you to 
keep any house till you and your wife lye together. 

Thus I have advised you, as my troubled memory can pre- 
sently suffer me. Beware of pride, stubborness, lechery, 
taunting, and sullenness, (which vices nature doth somewhat 
kindle in you,) and therefore you must with reason and dis- 
cretion make a new nature in yourselfe; to give yourmynde 
too much and greedily to gaming make a pastyme of it 
and no toyle. And lastly, delight to spend some tyme in 
reading of the scriptures, for therein is the whole comfort of 
man's lyfe, and all other things are vaine and transitory, and 
if you be diligent of reading of them they will remaine with 
you continually to your proffitt and commodity in this world, 
and to your comfort and salvation in the world to come, 
whither in grace of God I am now with joy e and consolation 
preparing myselfe. And upon my blessing beware of blinde 
papistry, which brings nothing but bondage to men's con- 
sciences. Mixe your prayers with fasting, not thinking there- 
by to merit, for there is nothing that we of ourselves can do 
that is good, we are but unprofitable servants : but fast, I say, 
thereby to tame the wicked affections of the mynde, and 
trust onely to be saved by Christ's precious bloud, for with- 
out your perfect faith therin there is no salvation. Let 
workes followe your faith thereby to shewe to the world that 
you do not onely saye you have faith, but that you give testi- 
mony thereof to the full satisfaction of the godly. I write 
somewhat the more herein, because perchance you have here- 
tofore heard, or perchance hereafter shall heare false brutes that 
I was a papist. But trust unto it, I never since I knew what 
religion meant, I thanke God, was of other mynde then now 
you shall heare that I dye in, although I cry God mercy I 
have not given fmites and testimony of my faith as I ha' 
ought to have done, the which is the thinge that I do now 
cheiflyest repent. When I am gone, forgett my condemning, 
and forgive, I charge you, my false accusers, as I protest 
to God I do, but have nothing to do with them if they lyve. 



1572.] NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. 407 

Surely Bannister* dealt no waye but honestly and truly ; 
Hickford did not hurt me in my conscience willingly, nor did 
not charge me with any great matter that was of weight 
otherwyse then truly. But the Bishop of Rosse,f and 
specially Barker, did falsely accuse me, and layd theyr owne 
treasons upon my backe. God forgive them as I do, and 
once againe I will you to do ; beare no malice in your mynde. 
And now, dear Philip, farewell. Read this my letter some- 
tymes over, it may chance make you remember yourselfe the 
better, and by the same, when your father is dead and rotten, 
you may see what counsell I would give you if I were alyve. 
If you follow these admonitions, there is no doubt but God 
will bless you, and I your earthly father do give you God's 
blessing and myne, with my humble prayers to Almighty 
God, that it will please him to bless you and your good 
Nanne, that you may both, if it be his will, see your chil- 

* All the names mentioned here, are those of persons concerned in 
the plot, whose evidence may be seen in Murdin. 

+ " The Lord knoweth/' says the Duke to the Queen, on the 23rd 
of January, " that I myself know no more than I have been charged 
withall, nor much of that, although, I humbly beseche God and your 
Majesty to forgive me, I knewe a greate deale too muche. But if it 
had pleased your highnes, that whylst I was a man in lawe, to have 
commanded my accusers to have been brought to my face, although of 
my own knowledge I knew no more then as I have particularly con- 
fessed, yet if it had pleased your Majesty, there might perchance have 
bolted out somewhat amongst them, which might have made some- 
what for myn own purgation, and your highnes perchance have there- 
by known that which now is undiscovered. For certayn it is, that 
these practyses of rebellions and invasions, were not brutes without 
some full intention. God, of his mercifull goodnesse, I hope, will dis- 
close all things that may be dangerous to your excellent Majesty : and 
then I hope your highnes shall perceave that Norfolk was not such 
a traytor, as he hath, not without his own desertes, given great oc- 
casion of suspycion." He goes on to point out these accusers, and the 
deepest intriguers in the plot, as " the one a shamelesse Scote, (the 
bishop of Ross,) and the other an Italianifyed Englishman." Murdin, 
p. 170. 



408 NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. [JAN. 

drens' children to the comfort of you both, and afterwards 
you may be partakers of the heavenly kingdome. Amen, 
Amen. 

Tom,* out of this that I have written to your brother, you 
may learne such lessons as are fitt for you, and therefore I will 
not repeat them againe ; that I write to one I write to all, 
except it be particular notes which particularly touche any 
one of you. To feare and serve God is generally to you all, 
and of my blessing take greatest care thereof, for it is the 
foundation of all goodness. You have even from your infancy 
been given to be stubborne, beware of that vice, Tom, and bridle 
nature with wisdome, for all ills commonly dependes of that 
vice. Though you be her Majesty's warde, yet if you use 
yourselfe well to my Lord Burghley, he will, I hope, get you 
to buy your owne wardshipp, and then I should have lyking to 
my daughter-in-lawe, Mary D acres ; I hope you shall have it 
in your owne choice. I will not advise you otherwayes then 
yourselfe when you are of fittyeares shall thinke good, but this 
assure yourselfe it will be good augmentation to your small 
living, considering how chargeable the world groweth to be. 
Followe your elder brother's advice, who, I hope, will take 
such a course as may be to all your comforts. God send 
him grace so to do, and you too. If you followe these my ad- 
vices, then I give you God's blessing and myne, and I hope 
the Lord will prosper you. 

Well-beloved Nanne, t that hathe been as deare to me as 
if you had been myne owne daughter, although considering 
this ill happe that is now chanced, you might have had a 
greater marriage then now your husband shall be ; yet I hope 
you will remember that when you were marryed the case was 

* Thomas was the Duke's eldest son by his second wife Margaret, 
daughter of Thomas Lord Audley of Walden, and inherited this title 
as Lord Howard of Walden by his mother's right : he was afterwards 
created Earl of Suffolk. 

t Anne, sister and coheir of Thomas Lord Dacre, of Gillesland, mar- 
ried to Philip, the Duke's eldest son. 



1572.] NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. 409 

faiT otherwayes, and therefore I hope your dutifull dealings 
shall be so to your husband and your sisterly love to your 
brothers-in-lawe and sisters-in-lawe, as my friends that shall 
see it, may thinke that my great affection to you was well 
bestowed. Thankes be to God, you have hitherto taken a 
good course, whereby all that wishes you well take great hope 
rather of your going forwardes therein then backwardes, 
which Ood forbidd. I will request no more at your handes, 
now that I am gone, in recompense of my former love to you, 
but that you will observe my three lessons, to feare and serve 
God, flying idleness, to love faithfully your husband, and to 
be kinde to your brothers and sisters, specially committing to 
your care myne own onely daughter Megge,* hoping that you 
will not be a sister- in-lawe to her, but rather a naturall sister, 
yea, even a very mother, and that as I tooke care for the 
well-bestowing of you, so you will, when her yeares shall 
be fitt for marriage, take care for the well-bestowing of her, 
and be a continuall caller on to your husband for the same. 
If this mishappe had not chanced, you and your husband 
might have been awhile still younge, and I would, by God's 
helpe, have supplyed your wantes. But now the case is 
changed, for you must to your years of fifteen attayne to 
the consideration and discretion of twenty, or else if God 
send you to lyve, in your age you shall have causes to 
repent your folly in youth, besides the indangering and 
casting awaye of them that do wholy depend upon your 
two well doings. I do not mistrust, but that you will be 
mindfull of my last naturall requests, and so doing, God 
bless you, and the issue that I hope will springe of your 
two bodyes, and send you to be old parents to vertuous 
children, which is likely est to be if yourselves give them 
good example. Farewell, for this is the last that ever you 
shal receive from your loving father. Farewell, my deare Nanne. 
Megge, I have, as you may see, committed you to your 

* The Duke of Norfolk had two daughters, Margaret and Elizabeth, 
of which perhaps the latter died young. 



410 NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. [JAN. 

loving sister, I charge you, therefore, upon my blessinge, that 
you obey in all thinges, as you would do me, or your owne 
mother, if she were living, and then I doubt not but by her 
good meanes you shall be in fitt tyme bestowed to your 
owne comfort and contentation. Be chast, no babler, and 
ever be busyed in doing somewhat, and give your mynde 
to reading in the Bible and such other good bookes, whereby 
you may learne to feare God, and so you shall prove, by 
God's helpe, hereafter, the better wife, and a good and vir- 
tuous woman in all other respects. If you followe these my 
lessons, then God's blessing and myne I give you, and pray 
to God that you may both lyve and dye his servant. Amen. 

Will,* though you be now younge, yet I hope if it shall 
please God to send you life, that you will then consider of 
the precepts here before written to your brethren, which I give 
as well to you as to them. Be obedyent to your elder bro- 
thers. I have committed the charge of your bringing up to 
your elder brother, and therefore I charge you to be as obe- 
dyent to him as you would ha 7 been to me, if I had been 
lyving. I do assure myself that his dealing to you will be 
like a brother of the whole bloud, and not halfe bloud. If 
you followe these my precepts, then God shall bless you, if 
otherwise, thinke not that God scourgeth lightly children that 
be disobedyent to theyr father's godly lessons. As you are the 
youngest, so the more you ought to be obedyent to your 
elders. God send you good younger brother's fortune in this 
world, and his grace, that you may ever be his, both in this 
world and the world to come. Amen. 

I may not forgett my two pretty daughters-in-law, Mallf 
and little Bess.f I pray God send all things so prosperous, 

* William, second son of the Duke by his second wife, and ancestor 
of the present Earl of Carlisle. 

t Mary, sister and coheiress of Thomas, Lord Dacre of Gillesland, 
married to Thomas Howard. 

t Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas, and sister and coheiress of George, 
Lord Dacre of Gillesland, married to William Howard. 



1572.] NORFOLK'S LETTER TO HIS CHILDREN. 411 

as, if it be his will, you may be double daughters-in-lawe, as 
well by your owne marryages as you were before by my mar- 
rying of your good and vertuous mother. These lessons that 
I have given to your sisters without repetition I give unto 
you. Though I were not your natural 1 father, yet my de- 
serts have been deserved so well at your handes, as few of 
myne owne I have done so much for, you and those that shall 
come of you shall fare the better for my cost and travell. I 
hope you will be mindfull hereof when your years and occa- 
sion shall desire proofe. God send you both, my loving 
daughter-in-lawes, as well to do, as I wish to those that are 
come of myne owne bodye. Now to bidd you all farewell 
together, I desire you for Christ his sake to be mindfull of my 
short lessons, which are proceeded from as naturall father 
and father-in-lawe as ever children had, and in so doing God 
will bless you, and I send you my blessing, which I pray God 
may prove to you, my sonnes, as well as Isaacke did to Jacob ; 
and to you, my daughters, as well as .... did to Rebecca. 
Amen. 

And now, deare and loving children, farewell. God I 
hope will be your comfort and guide, and I hope ere it be 
longe to be ridd out of this wretched world, to follow my 
deare wives and your mother in the heavenly joyes, whither 
pray God send me, and you afterwards, when it shall be his 
will and pleasure to take you out of this vale of misery. 
Amen. Once againe, lastly, and for ever, I charge you all to 
remember my honest requests, in following whereof in the 
end yourselves shall reape the commoditye. 

The 20 of January, 1571. God be all your comfort, Amen, 
and send me to dye his servant. 

Tom, I had forgotten to request one thing at your handes, 
which I hope you will hereafter, when tyme cometh, per- 
forme. It is this : I promised Bowles a lease of a farme of 
yours, in your landes called St. Taylots, which, if I had 
lyved, I would have performed, and now I hope you will, if 
God send you to come to years, performe as much as I meant 



412 SIR JAMES MELVIL. [MARCH, 

to have done. He hath been as honest and true a servant to 
your father as any that he hath had, and therefore I hope at 
this my request, he shall have the lease at your hand. God 
bless you and keep you in his feare ! Amen. 

Written by the hande of your loving father and father-in- 
lawe, now being ready and willing to parte out of this world, 
I hope into the life everlasting. 

T. N. 



SIR JAMES MELVIL TO RANDOLPH. 

As ermytes were wont to retire them in solitary places, 
even so am I drawen to a quiet manner of lyving, content 
with the portion which God has given me, wha has also 
movit the harts of my Lord Regent and the nobilitie to be 
protectors of my quietnes, quhilk is such that I neyther am 
curious of newes nor desirous of negotiations. 

I covet till understand of your weilfare since you war 
married, and how Maister Killegrew and Maister Walsingham 
does, and how Master Dru Drewrie does, and how the Mar- 
shallf is in prosperitie. Wer not that ye are but laitely married, 
I wold pitie your caire, that can get no rest, bot is still occu- 
pied with combersome occupations, whereby it apperis that 
sic as procured for you that voyage war your frends, and 
geve 1 ye procured it yourself, ye ware your own frend. 

I have conceaved a firm opinion that ye wold have shifted 
till fayr weather, were not that ye are utterly myndit till 
peacefy our troubled estait, whereby ye may wype away the 
wicked opinion of the vulgarre that beleeve the contrary, and 



* Sir James Melvil, the author of the memoirs. It is he who, in his 
memoirs, first lays to the charge of Randolph the fomenting, by his 
private intrigues, the troubles of Scotland. 

t Sir William Drury, Marshall of Berwick. 

1 If. 



1572.] STATE OF SCOTLAND. 413 

now and then will speake theyr pleasure. Whatsoever he be 
that parturbes my quiet lyfe and estait with any business, 
will get of me lyke thankes as Alexander had of Diogenes, 
when he stode betweene him and the sunne. 

Therefore I pray you favour my quietnes, and find no 
fault that I presse not till come where you are, for my affec- 
tion toward you of old is so untired, that it must be yet a 
grete storme and a more vehement blast, afore it can be 
blowen out and away, howbeit I have yet matter and store of 
lyking in keping for convenient time. Thus, with my harty 
commendation, I take my leif, praying the Eternall till send 
a good succor to your affaires concerning concord. 

Wreten at Mordow, having this 14th day of Marche. 
Your crabit auld constant affectioned frend, 

JAMES MELVILLE. 



RANDOLPH, &c. TO LORD SCROPE.* 

After our verie hartie recommendations unto your Lord- 
ship, we have receaved your Lordship's letter by this bearer, 
your servant, and perceive therby howe desyrous the Lord 
Herres is to have hymself and frends forborne in the tyme of 
this treatie of peace, to which purpose he was also in hande 
with us at his being here. No other answer can be given 
unto hym in our opinions then that which your Lordship 
hathe given, that if he sheweth hymself obedient to the Kyng 
and the authoritie nowe standing, he shall receive all the 
favour bothe towards hymself and frends that lawefully maye 

* This letter is without signature, but was probably written by 
Randolph, who was now again in Scotland. Elizabeth had sent com- 
missioners to endeavour to bring about an arrangement between the 
two contending parties, but her intentions were frustated by the ob- 
stinacy of those in the castle, who refused to acknowledge on any 
conditions the authority of the king and regent. 



414 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

be shewed. Wherin also your Lordship's advise unto hym 
is verie good, that the sooner he do it the better. 

His determination and promise to the Regent is to be here 
with his chief frends upon Fridaye in the Easter weeke, and 
then withoute farther respecte unto their doings in the castle,* 
to submit hym self unto the authorite. If he do thys, as we 
truste he wyll, what other reasonable requeste be made by 
hym, either for hym self or frends, we thynke it shall not be 
denyed hym by the Regent, and as we do fynd his good in- 
tent and meaning herin, so shall he have that furtherance 
that we can shewe hym. 

Touching the matters we came for, we stande yet in verie 
uncertayne termes. The castle-men yelde nothing of their 
wyll, utterly myslyking this kynd of government. The Regent 
and his partie are reasonable enoughe to yelde unto any thinge 
that maye procure peace. La Crocke is looked for here verie 
shortelie. If he come with the lyke commission and mynde 
that we be of, we truste to put it to a shorte poynte. 

The 25th of this instant, the moste partie of the noblemen 
that professe the King's obedience and divers other that this 
longe tyme have taken neither parte, mynde to be in this 
towne, intending all to do what may be done to bring this 
countrie to quietnes, which is the beste hope and likelihood 
we have of any good to be, either nowe or never. 

The Regent is nowe at Sterlinge. The Earle of Morton 
hathe here the chief charge, and is day lie kepte occupied by 
those of the castle. 

Oute of Englande we have not hearde very muche of late. 
By advertisement given from hence by us the shippe that the 
Lord Seton came in to Harwich, was stayed there. A box of 
the Lord Seton's found with letters, by the which a practice 
is discovered of some men's intent here to have found the 
meanes to have had the Kinge conveide owte of this countrie, 



* The castle was still held by the party opposed to the government, 
headed by Grange and Lethington, and was besieged by Morton. 



1572.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 415 

into Spayne or Flanders. There wer also founde letters to some 
other in Scotlande, that had agreed for a some of money to 
have the Earle of Northumberland sett at liberty, and to have 
gone into Flanders.* Bothe which matters being discovered, 
we dowte not some order wyll be shortely taken bothe for this 
King's better suretie, and for the Earl of Northumberland's 
deliverie owte of the place where he is, some other wayes. 

Having nothing els to trouble your Lordship with, but the 
remembrance of our duties to yourself and your good Ladye, 
we hartely take our leave. 

Upon your Lordship's man's arrivall we were over the 
water, and since our returne here have beene much occu- 
pied, so that ther is no faulte in your Lordship's servante for 
his longe abode here. 

(March 19, 1571.) 



RANDOLPH TO THE BISHOP OF DURHAM. 

Knowing of this bearer, Roger Pilsson, my olde servant's 
repaire towards your Lordship, I wolde not leave my duetie 
undone by my letters, with desyre to be excuse that I sawe 
not your Lordship at my passing by you, the waye and 
weather being so evil and myself not well at ease, mynding 

* " Whereas," says the Queen in her letter to Randolph of the same 
date as the present, (MS. Lansdowne, No. 13, Art. 54,) " the Lord 
Seton is come thither through our realme, though he escaped, unfor- 
tunately for himself, with a rebel, one of the Countess of Northum- 
berland's men, yet the shippe that brought him and some of his ser- 
vants was taken, and such secret writings of his, and of our rebells, 
as were left in the shippe to have been conveide after him by sea into 
Scotlande, are brought to such a lighte, as we have cause to thank 
God, to have such dangerous practises against us discovered. And 
theruppon we have stayed La Crocque for coming thither at this tyme, 
wishing that whilest he shall here staye you will make some speede 
there, for we cannot, as we think, convenyently staye him long here." 



416 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [MAY, 

God wylling, to see your Lordship on my return, whereof 1 
am as yet uncertayne, as we are to what end those matters 
will take which we have in hande. 

After the 25th of this instant, when the whole assemblie of 
the rrends of either partie wil be, we shal be able to give some 
readie gesse what may become of it, or at the least we mynde 
not after that daye to make longe abode here. 

Those of the castell attende La Crocke, a Frenchman's, 
coming, thynking to fynde more comforte and assurance at 
his handes than we can give them, except theie will ac- 
knowledge their obedience to the King and Regent, which 
hytherto theie refuse to do, and we withowte that can do 
nothing for them. Of their particular doings, and in what 
sorte eache other deale with other, this bearer can shewe 
your Lordship. 

Oute of London we feare yet no other but that he* re- 
mayneth yet alive, that is to be wished long synce he had 
bene dispached. 

I feare that the Bishop of Lincoln's words in his sermone 
before her Majestic will prove true, alleged out of Augus- 
tine, that there was misericordia puniens, crudelitas parcens, 
in consyderation whereof, great evil dyd insue. God have 
your Lordship in his keeping. 

At Lyethe, the 23 st of Marche. 



WILLIAM SMITH TO HIS BROTHER JAMES WODCOKE.f 

Anno Domini, 1572, the 15th of May, in Joraslave. 
Brother James, with hart unfayned I send you most harty 

* The Duke of Norfolk. The Queen's reluctance to order his exe- 
cution is well known. 

f The reign of Elizabeth was one of commercial adventure^ and 
then first were the energies of our countrymen turned to long voyages. 



1572.] THE ENGLISH TRADE WITH RUSSIA. 417 

commendations, trusting in God that you are in good healthe, 
with all the rest of your good friends and rnyne, as I was at 
the making hereof, desiring the continuance of the same unto 
the pleasure of God and to your owne hart's desires, &c. 
Your's from Ratlypfe, being of the 20th of Aprill,in a shipe, 
[ have received very well, understanding the contents thereof, 

and foreign trade. Through the whole of her reign, was preserved 
the intimate connexion between England and Russia, then known 
by the name of Muscovy, which had been begun under that savage tyrant 
the Czar Ivan Basilovitch. The Moscovy company was established 
so early as 1567. The jealousies caused by the monopoly of the 
company, and the envy of other nations, brought them under the dis- 
pleasure of the Czar, and Randolph was sent over to ' heal the sores' 
which these jealousies had occasioned. " At his intercession," as 
Camden tells us, "the Emperor, in his singular good-will to the 
Queene and the English nation, granted to the English company in 
Russia freedome from all payment of custome, and liberty to carry and 
vend their merchandises wheresoever they would, throughout all the 
countries of his most spacious empire, and to transport them into Per- 
sia and Media by the Caspian sea, (whereas the merchants of other 
nations might not go a mile beyond the city of Moskow,) and gave 
them houses to twist their ropes and cables in for shipping, and a 
little country five miles in circuit, with woods to make iron, and tooke 
the English into an opprisney, that is, into a choice seede of his people. 

"And now the English began more confidently to survey those 
countries, carrying their merchandises up the river Dwina in boates 
made of one whole pieces of tree, which they rowed and towed up the 
streame with halsers as farre as Wologda, and from thence by land, 
seven dayes' journey to Yeraslaw, and then by the Wolga, (which is 
about a mile over, and runneth through a clayish soyl, beset with 
oakes and birchen trees, thirty dayes and as many nights' journey 
downe the river to Astracana. And from Astracana (where they built 
ships) they did by a very great and memorable adventure, many 
times crosse the Caspian sea, which is very full of flats and shelfes, and 
pierced through the vast deserts of Hircania and Bactriana to 
Teuerin and Casbin, cities of Persia, in hopes at length to discover 
Cathay. But the warres which shortly after grewe hot betwene the 
Turkes and Persians, and the robberies of the barbarians, interrupted 
this laudable enterprise of the Londoners. The Emperor sent back 
Randolph with presents, and with him Andreas Gregoriwitz Saviena, 
with a goodly shewe after the manner of that nation, who was yal- 
VOL. I. II 



418 THE ENGLISH IN RUSSIA. [MAY, 

being very sorry for the decease of your father, whose soul I 
beseche the living God to take unto his mercy. Amen. I 
pray you have me commended unto your bed-fellow, as one 
unbeknown unto me as yet, but I trust tyme wil be when I 
shall better know what she is. Also I praye you forget not 
my commendations unto your brother Mathew, and to your 
sisters, with all the rest of our frends in Kent, as Bess Jylls, 
and your Aunt Avery's sons and daughters, whose healths I 
desire as myne owne. You also write me that my cosen 
Yeastus and his wyfe were in good healthe, with myn Aunt 
Smythe and my cosen Gillian Smythe, and all the rest of 
my frends, saving them that are dead. Of the healths of my 
frends before written, I greatly rejoyce, praying for the con- 
tinuance thereof. But as for those that are dead, I can do 
no lesse but thank God for it, trusting he hathe received 
them unto his mercy ; but you write me so suspiciously, that 
I cannot tell ho we to take it, neither can I judge who they 
are that are dead, but that I leve tintill another tyme. You 
prayed the Gods that I might be alyve to reade your letter, 
and you should be somewhat the better : the lyke I praye for 
you, not only to reade this my letter, but to send us both a 
merry meeting, and then we may be the better. 

This countrey of Unsland is greatly changed since you 
were here, and things goeth not so convenient with English- 

lantly entertained by the Londoners and honorably received by the 
Queene." 

The English, however, held the favour of the capricious monarch by 
a very uncertain tenure. On the return of his ambassador, the English 
fell again into displeasure, but he was soon after pacified by a kind 
letter from Queen Elizabeth. In MS. Cotton, Nero, B. xi. is preserved 
a copy of a letter written by Elizabeth from Hampton Court to the 
Czar, in May, 1570, promising to receive him hospitably in case his 
enemies should drive him from his dominions. 

The name of Smith is so common that it would not perhaps be easy 
to ascertain who was the individual who wrote this letter, though the 
search would be facilitated by the numerous friends and kinsmen 
mentioned in it. A part at least of his family was Kentish. 



]07'2.] THE ENGLISH IN RUSSIA. 11 J) 

men as it hathe done. I aryved at Austrican the last sommer 
in June, and at our aryvall there was order come down from 
the Mosko to take custom of all Englishmen that shall come 
out of Perssia, and to seal up our goods, and to send us all 
up to the Musko, and not to suffer one of us to go over sea 
agayne, and Mr. Bannester and Mr. Ducket being yet in 
Perssia, giving in commission unto me to have returned 
agayne with our barks for them, but in no wise could not be 
suffered. Whereupon I am constrayned now to make another 
voiage to fetche them home. The agent here, Mr. Procter, 
and I were at varyance about it. I would not a gone back 
agayn in no wise, but to have commen home, but there was 
suche matters layd to my charge, that if I went not the 
company's stock were lyke all to be loste, and so threatened 
that if I wold not go it were good for me never to come in 
England before the face of the company. If it were now as 
it hath ben hertofore, I would sett little by the voiage, but it 
is now wonderfull dangerous, and in a manner ten to one but 
we shall be taken or slayn, by reason of the great wars which 
are now betwyne the Emperor and the Tarters and Cryms, 
and also the Cresymissis, which are now rebellious against the 
Emperor. But yet there is a God that dothe aid and keep all 
those that put their trust in him, which is my only refuge, 
who I trust will defend me in all tyme of necessitie. Since 
your departure from thence, the mark is burnt, where I had 
as much ware as came to sixty robbulls, 1 burnt every pack, 
and now lykewise I am constrayned to leve all my goods be- 
hind me by reason of naughty markets here. Silk that was 
used to be sold for a robull and a half an ounce is not now 
worth one robull. If it had not ben for a friend that doth 
give me credit for a three score robulls, I had caryed with 
me litell now, yet I thank God I have an hundred robulls 
venture with me at this present into Persia, and leave enoughe 
behind me to pay all men, and somewhat spare. 

You were happy that ye came not with Mr. Bannester into 
i Roubles. 

E E'> 



420 THE ENGLISH IN RUSSIA. [MAY, 

Perssia. If you had you should a felt some of these troubles 
that I do. You were happy you were so soon departed out 
of the company's service. A man may sone come into it, 
but he cannot get so sone out agayne. I am hired but from 
year to year, and to give me one year's warning, but I have 
given warning for five year agone and yet cannot get away. 
I could have had fifty robulls a year, and meat and drink, to 
have served the Emperor, and I had thought to have taken 
it to have been rid of this voiage, and had made playne 
answer unto the agent that I would not go, and then I was 
in a worse perplexity then before, doubting if I had entered 
into his service that I should not get owte again when I 
would, for I had rather die then forsake my country. Sibbe, 
Mr. Vydam's servant, serves the Emperor, and is apoynted as 
granne capitayn, under a Russe gentleman, of the gaily at 
the Narve, and Robin Trimbote, master gunner ; Will, Mr. 
Band's boye, was apoynted both master and capitayn, but he 
dyed of the plague the last sommer. There is as good as 
a sixteen Englishe maryners at the Narve, which dothe serve, 
and hathe good entertaynment : he that is worst hathe thirty 
robulls a year, and fifteen d. a daye besides, to find him 
meat and drink, and a house they have every man at the 
Emperor's charges, so the maryners bereth all the sway there 
now. And Cattelling, he is chief and judge over all, joyned 
with a Russ Boyaren, who is appointed as Ammerall. Cat- 
teling hathe a hundred robles a year, and twenty d. a 
daye : he hathe made a great gaily, and a brikondin already, 
which goeth out this sommer. 

Of these matters I leve, and begin with some others : as 
first, I will desire you to do my commendations to a fellowe 
and companion of yours and myne, whose name is Robard 
Croke, who I think by this tyme hath gotten him a cham- 
ber-fellow. I heare saye he gave assaute unto Shea with the 
red hede and upon the wall, and afterwards unto Annes 
Yvye, but I know not as yet whether he dyd wine the swort 
or no. I wold be very glad to hear howe he dothe. T have 



1572.] THE ENGLISH IN RUSSIA. 421 

written commendations unto him every time, but I can hear 
none from him. I think a will not be acquainted with such 
poor knaves as I am. I pray you show him this, and bid 
him leave his dancing and venting, and remember now 
and then to write to his old friends, which are dispersed 
abroad in strange countries. Also I pray you do my commen- 
dations unto Robert Wilson, and his wife, with health pre- 
missed, and tell him I have heard somewhat that should be 
reported unto him of me by Thomas Sowtham, which I think 
doth make him somewhat offended with me, and not with- 
out a cause, if it should be true, but tell him from me it was 
a stark lye. I never reported no such thing, for I were a 
villayn if I should. I marvel he would never open it to me 
when he was here; I perceive it was reported before he 
went first home, by your letters you sent me when he re- 
ported unto you I played scant the honest man with him. 
Therefore bid him not have no doubt in that, for it is as 
false as God is true. Much you writ me in another of 
your letters, that I played the gentleman with you in your 
cabin in writing in a maid's book, which I thank you ye 
forgave me my fact. Also I had the letters from you as con- 
corning your good success into Levent, being very glad to 
hear of your forwardness and good fortune ; also I had letters by 
Michael Stint . . .,wherein you writtme you had written many 
letters and could never have answer of them. In good faith, 
I have had dyvers, giving you most hearty thanks for your 
gentile remembrance in remembering me, and also I have not 
ben unmindful of you when time served in writing unto you, 
but God knows whether my letters came to your hands 
or not. I pray you do my commendations to my brother, 
Thomas Smith, and say he is a very honest young man in 
taking such pains in writing unto me. I mean to make him 
some part of amends, when that God sends me home. I 
had never but one letter from him since my coming hither. 
Others I have not to write at this present, but praying God 



422 THE ADMIRAL COLIGNY. [MAY, 

to keepe you in healthe, and send us a merry meeting, when 
it shall please hym. 

Your's to his power at all tymes, 

WILLIAM SMITHE. 

I pray you let me hear from time to time from you, as you 
shall do the like from me as time shall serve. 

Brate Yakobe possaldie pregottoui pro mina Jonnisko got- 
tory Crosshinko ye mollodinko. protiuo ya preyeado dorna 
I possalli Chollombite ut misna barbara Wode ye velly 
onna ys doute mina golli te take. Dispiesse pro mina brate 
boudes dessinsert. 

Pro brat weyo, 

WILLIAM SMITHE.* 



THE ADMIRAL COLIGNYf TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Monsieur, il y a quelque temps que ja'y recu lalettre que 
vous avez escripte du 2 e du mois passe, qui m'a apporte le 
tant plus grand contentement que j'ay veu par icelle le desir 

* This postscript was no doubt intended to astonish all his friends in 
Kent. 

f TRANSLATION. " Sir, some time ago I received the letter which 
you wrote me the second of the last month, which gave me the greater 
contentation, as I saw by it the desire and affection which you have 
to the entertainment of that mutual friendship which exists between 
the two crowns, and to the advancement of the glory of God, having 
on my part very good will to employ myself to both these objects, 
and being entirely of the same advise as your, sir, that as the sup- 
porters of Satan do all they can to hinder works so holy as these, we 
who have the honour and succour of God and of our princes recom- 
mended to us, let us be no less diligent to procure and advance them 
than the others are to delay and diminish them. In which I will on my 
side assist and aid you with all my power, praying you to continue in 
this holy mind, and to send me by Dupin, my secretary, the bearer 
whom you know, your news, and believing what he will tell you equally 
as though it had been myself, who after recommending myself hum- 



157*2.] THE ADMIRAL COLIGNY. 423 

et affection que vous avez a I'entretienement de ceste mutual 
amity queen est entry ces deux coronas, et a Tadvancement de 
la gloire de Dieu, ayant de ma part bien bonne volume 
de m'employer a Tun et a 1'autre, et estant bien de cest advise 
avecques vous, Monsieur, que comme les supposts de satan 
font tout ce qu'ilz peuvent pour empescher des oeuvres si 
saints que ceulx-la, nous acres, queen avons 1'honneur et le 
service de Dieu et de nos princes en recommendacion, no 
soyons pas moins diligent a les procurer et advancer que les 
acres sont a les recorder et a moindrir. En quoy je vous 
assisteray et ayderay de mon cost de tout ce qu'il me sera pose 
sible, vous priant de vous continuer en votre saint inten- 
tion et me mander par Dupin mon secretaire le porteur 
que vous congnoisse de vos nouvelles, le croyant de celles 
qu'il vous dira de ma part, comme moi mesrnes, queen, apres 
me tres humblement recommender a votre bonne grace, 
supplieray Dieu vous donner, Monsieur, en parfaict sante, 
heureuse et longue vie. 

De Chastillon, ce 27 e jour de May, 1572. 

Votre entierement bon et bien parfaict amy, 

CHASTILLON. 



WILLIAM HERLE TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

I received yesternight, my right honourable good Lord, 
a letter from Flushing, directed thence on Friday last, which 

bly to your good graces, will pray God to give you, Sir, in perfect 
health, a happy and long life. From Chatillon, the 27th day of May. 
Your entirely good and very perfect friend." 

Gaspard de Coligni, Lord Admiral of France, born at Chatillon 
sir Loirig in 1516, was now the head of the Huguenots, and was one 
of the bravest soldiers and greatest men of his time. He bore an 
exemplary character, but he was hated by the party of the Guises for 
the great influence he gave to the Protestants by his counsels as well 
as his sword. Scarce three months after the writing of this letter he 
was treacherously murdered in the horrible massacre of St. Bar- 
tholomew. 

* This William Herle seems to have been a person employed by 






424 THE ENGLISH IN THE NETHERLANDS. [JULY, 

for that it is of a fresh date, I am bolde to iinparte it with your 
Lordship. On Wensday there arrived two hundred and fifty 
French soldiers, who being received by the town into gar- 
rison, the day following Sir Humphrey Gilbert with his 
company arrived there algo.f But Tzarras, who takes upon 
him to be governor of the towne, wold not suffer him to enter, 
but shutting the gates agaynst him and his, made a playne 
declaration that no more Englishe soldiers should be ad- 
mitted there, which did so move the myndes of the English- 
men, as they were ready to returne all to theyr contrey agayn, 
and hereuppon the townsmen not able to endure this un- 
worthines, which they have used by Tzarras and the French- 
men, assembled together and arming themselves came to 
Tzarras, expressing with great heate and vehemence, that 
they would be governed by the Englishmen, who were their 
ancient frends and nere neighbours, they sayd, and with their 

Burghley as a gatherer of intelligence, and sometimes as a spy. He 
seems to be the same man who introduced himself this year into the 
society of Mather and Berneye, in order to betray their plot against 
Burghley's life. We shall afterwards frequently find him send letters 
of intelligence to the Treasurer 

* " Now, after a very gallant shewe of armes and skirmishing before 
the Queene at Greenewiche, martiall men, which spent their time at 
home in idleness, began to flock into the Low Countries out of Eng- 
land, some (according as they stood affected to the parties) to the 
Duke of Alva, and some (whicn were indeed the far greater number) 
to the Prince of Orange, who, in respect of religion and freedome, op- 
posed himself against Alva. The first of all that went was Thomas 
Morgan, who caried over three hundred men to Vlishing ; the report of 
whose coming is thought to have stayed the Duke of Alva, when he 
was in readiness to recover Vlishing. Afterwards, through the pro- 
curement of Morgan, arrived there nine companies of English under 
Sir Humphrey Gilbert, who, with the French their associates, first 
attempted Sluise and Bruges, and then gave an assault to Ter-goes in 
Suith-Bevelandt. But for that their ladders were too short, and that 
the French and English agreed not well together, and that Mon- 
dragon came to the relief of the besieged, they retired to Vlishing." 
Camden. 



1572.] OCCUPATION OF FLUSHING. 425 

blood had most valiantly defended them and their town, 
and had preserved the lives of them all, objecting to him 
that he had brought in thither Frenchmen, who neither had 
discipline nor religion, but such as did devour and spoil them 
of all that they had, and in effect were no better than pillars and 
thieves, and might with the like mind, in growing stronger, 
oppress both them and their liberty, threatening with very 
injurious words to break open the gates, and whether he 
wold or not to let in the English. Which contention con- 
tinued a six hours, and at the last the matter was pacified, 
and SirH. Gilbert with his company received into the town, 
with such a general affection of the townsmen, as both 
tears were shed, and their own beds presented to ... 
the Englishmen, though they should lie on the ground them- 
selves, also the French fain to give place unto them, so as 
the whole trust and government is now in our nation. They 
meant to send a number of men into that island, called Beve- 
land, to cut of the vittayles that they of Tergus did send 
daily to those of Myddelburgh. The intelligence is there 
that the most part of the soldiers of Myddelburgh are re- 
turned, being called to Bruxelles, and that there is no garrison 
left at that little pile called Sowbmgh, a mile and a half from 
Flushing, where the skirmish began on Mydsommer even. 

The French merchants have bought up all the pepper 
at ten stivers a pound, which they say is to paye a great dett 
that Count Lodovick doth owe, and for the rest of the spicery 
it is at such high prices, as small good or none is to be done 
therewith, which, my good Lord, is th'effect of the letter that I 
have received, as also there is a Dutchman come over who can 
perchance declare many things to your Lordship. 

Lastly, pardon me, my right honourable Lord, if I, as a 
poor and humble well-wilier of your Lordship's, do rejoice 
of that good hap that her Majesty and the whole realm hath, 
the advancing you to the Tresorership of England,* wherein 
the place receives more honour and profitt by you, than it can 

* Lord Burghley was made treasurer this year, (July 13,) on the 
death of the Marquis of Winchester. 



426 THE PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. [JULY, 

give you againe, whom God increase, I desire it humbly 
and vehemently uppon my knees, in all virtue and great- 
nes, as your worthines deserves, wherewith, with all humili- 
tie, I finish e. 

From my lodging, this Monday morning, 14th July, 1572. 
Your Lordship's porest bedeman, 

WM. HERLLE. 



SIR FRANCIS WALSINGHAM TO LORD BURGHLEY.* 

Touching the particularities of Janli's overthrowe I refer 
your Lordship to suche incertainties as I have set downe in 
the inclosed occurrents. Suche of the religion here, as before 
did sleepe in securitie, begin now to awake and to see their 
danger, and do therefore conclude that unlesse this enter- 
prise in the Low Countrey have good succes, theire case 
groweth desperate. They have therefore of late sent unto 
the King (who is absent from hence) to shewe hym, that if 
the Prince of Orange quayle, it shall not lye in him to rnayn- 
tayne them in his protection by vertue of his edict. They 
desyre hym, therefore, out of hand to resolve upon something 
that maye be for his assistance, offering themselves to em- 
ploye therin their lyves, lands, and goods. They see, by the 
assistance given on the other syde, as by the Pope, Florence, 
Triers, Bavieres, and Cullen, who proceade roundly and re- 
solutely in the matter, and are not otherwise interessed in 
the Low Countryes, or in the cause, but in respect of re- 
ligion, that unless her Majestic and the Princes of Ger- 
manie in lyke sort joyne with this crowne, in this cause, there 
i s great doubt what will be the event of the enterprise. 

The Duke [10]f has therefore requested me to desire your 
Lordship, as you tender God's glory, and her Majestie's safe tie, 

* This letter is not printed in Digs. It shows that shortly before 
the day of St. Bartholomew,, the Protestants in France were full of 
fears and suspicions. 

f A cipher. 



1572.] THE PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. 427 

to see if you can induce her (upon overture first to be made 
by the King in this behalf) to join with him in yielding 
assistance. He thinks to bring him to make the overture, 
so that they might be in some assurance that her Majestic 
would give ear thereto. 

They have also dispatched one of late to such of the 
Princes of Germany, as favour the cause, to provoke them to 
proceed more resolutely and roundly in this matter, lay 
ing before them the evident dangers that otherways will 
ensue. 

By one lately come from thence, they understand, that the 
said Princes begin to see the danger, and are well bent to do 
anything that may tend to remedy. The party above wryt- 
ten desires with some speed to know, how her Majesty will 
incline to the said overture : for that thereafter they are to 
direct their affairs. 

As I was writing, I received a copy of a letter sent from 
Montz ; which I send unto your Lordship here enclosed ; 
by the which you may both perceive the state of the town, 
and also how many are retired thither of Janli's company. 

And so leaving farther to trouble your Lordship at this pre- 
sent, beseeching God to bless you in your late honourable col 
ling,* with as good success as ever any that occupied that 
place, I most humbly take my leave. From Paris, the 25th 
of Juliet, 1572. 

Your Honor's to command, 

FRA. WALSINGHAM. 



GEORGE BUCHANANf TO MR. RANDOLPH. 

I resavit two pair of letters of you sense my last writing 
to you. With the first I resavit Marinus Scotus, of quhilk I 

* Of Lord Treasurer. 

t This elegant letter is characteristic of the terse wit of King James' 
school-master, and the most famous of modern Latin poets. 

Sir James Melvil describes Buchanan as " a man of notable en- 



428 GEORGE BUCHANAN. [AUG. 

thank you greatly, and specially that your Inglisemen are 
found liars in their chronicles alledging on hym sic thyngs 
as he never said. I haif been vexed with sicknes all the 
tyme sense, and geif I had decessit, 1 you shuld haif 2 loset 
both the letters and recompense ; now I must never thank 
you, but geif 3 we are broken up of this folly laitely done on the 
border, for than 1 wyl hald the recompense as Inglis geir, bot 
geif peace followes, and nother ye do speak of mariage, or of 
the twasymptomes following on mariage, quhilk are jealousy e 
and cuccaldry, and the gut 4 carry not me away, I must find 
other 5 sum way to pay or lese kyndenes, or else, geifing 6 up 
kyndenes, pay you with evil wordes, and geif this fassion of 
dealing pleasit me, I haif reddy occasion to be angry with 
you, that haif wissit 7 me to be ane kentys man, quhilk in a 
manner is ane certaine half man, half beast, and yet for ane 
certaine consideration I wyl pass over that injury, imputing it 
more to your new folly than to aid wysdome. For geif ye had 
bene in your right wit, ye being anis escapit the tempestuous 
stormes and naufrage of marriage, had never entered againe 
in the same dangers. For I cannot tak you for ane stoik 
philosopher, having ane head inexpugnable with the frenetyk 
tormentis of jealousy, or ane cairless hart skeptick, that taks 
cuccaldrys as thyng indifferent. In thys caise I must nedis 
prefer the rude Scottis wy t of capitane Cocburne, to your In- 

dowments for his learning and knowledge in Latin poesie, much ho- 
noured in other countries, pleasant in conversation, rehearsing at all 
occasions moralities short and instructive, whereof he had abundance, 
inventing where he wanted. He was also religious, but was easily 
abused, and so facile, that he was led by every company that he 
haunted, which made him factious in his old days, for he spoke and 
wrote as those who were about him informed him, and he was become 
careless, following in many things the vulgar opinion ; for he was na- 
turally popular, and extremely revengeful against any man who had 
offended him, which was his greatest fault." 

George Buchanan was born in 1506, and died in 158 

1 Died. 2 Have. 3 If. 4 Gout. 5 Either. 

6 Giving. 7 Wished. 



1572.] GEORGE BUCHANAN. 429 

glis solomonical sapience, quhilk, weary of an wyfis, deliverit 
his to the Queyne again, botyou, deliverit of an wife, castis 
yourself in the same nets, et far poles dominant salvis tot 
revlibus ullam, and so Capitane Cocburne is in better case 
than you, for his sickness is in the feet J and yours in the 
heid.2 I pray you geif I be out of purpose, thynk not that I 
suld be maryitt, boat rather consider your awyn dangerous 
estait, of the quhilk the speaking has thus troublit my brain, 
and put me so far out of the way. 

As to my occupation at this present time, I am busy with 
our story of Scotland,* to purge it of some English lies and 
Scottis vanity. As to master Knox, his historic t is in his 
freindes' hands and thai are in consultation to mitigate sum 
part the acerbic of certain words, and sum taints wherein 
he has followit too much some of your English writaris, as M. 
Hal. et suppilatorem ejus Graftone, &c. As to Mr. Bozo,J 
I fear that ailed, 3 quhilk has put me from verse making, salde 
deliver him a scabie poetica, quhilk war an great pity, for he 
is an of the most singular poets that has been this lang 
time. As to your great prasyng given to me in your letter, 
geif ye scorn not, I thank you of luif 4 and kindness toward 
me, but I am sorry of your corrupt judgment. 

Here I wold say money injuries to you, war not that my 
gut commandis me to cesse, and I will also spair matter to 
my next writing. Fair weal, and God keep you. At Ster- 
ling, the sext of August. 

By yours at al my power, 

G. BUCHANAN. 

* Buchanan's History of Scotland, in Latin, was printed first at Ed- 
inburgh, in 1582, the year of his death. 

t John Knox died this present year. His History of the Reform 
tion of the Church of Scotland was first printed at London, in 1584. 

J Theodore Bozo was born 1519, and died a very old man in 1606. 
Feet. 2 Head. Old age. 4 Love. 



-1.30 SIEGE OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. [AUG. 



LETHINGTON TO MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.* 

It is very long sen I writ to your Majestic, not for lack of 
duty or diligence, but for lack of moyen to convey our letters. 
We have socht all meanes possible, but could fynd nane sure. 
We have hasarded with this bearer these few, with quham we 
dare not write amply for fear of intercepting, and I knaw not 
if this chifre > be sure. Gif your Majestic receive this safely, 
and fynde the moyen sure, write back, and your command- 
ment shall be obeyed. God knawis in what straite we your 
servants hes ben this twelfmonth past, and yet are. We send 
Mr. James Kirkaldy to France long before Yule, for ayde 
outher of men or money. He is yet still there, and can. 
get no despeche. We have found na frendship of France, 
and it apearisby Monsieur du Croc his doings in this countrey 
and his familiar dealing with the Regent, and his faction, 
that France favors their action a greate deale better then ours. 
Alwayes we get na ayde. 

The force of Scotland hes byne about this towne continu- 
ally all this yeir, and hes keipid us sa strait sen mid-lent 
reyn, that they suffrit not a peck of vittel to come to this 
castel sensyne. And whair pure 2 women hazardit on the 
night to bring in some on their backs for themselfes and their 
pure bairnes, ay as they fell in the hands of their watches, 
they wer hangit without mercy. Be that way they have hangit 
a great nombre of women, and some of thame with barne, 
and parted with barne upon the gallowes, a crualty not heard of 
in any contry. Yet it hes furderit their cause, and put the 
peple in sik feare that nane durst issue or enter in this towne, 
and brought us to sik streit of vittel that the hail 3 pepill as 
well inhabitants of the towne as subdarts, wer brocht to ex- 
treme hunger. By mediation of the ambassador of France 

* An intercepted letter in cypher, dated Aug. 10, 1572, and endorsed 
as decyphered, Dec. 5. 

i Cipher. 2 Poor. 3 Whole. 



1572.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 431 

and the Queen of England, there is an abstinence tan for 
two months with disadvantages conditions to us, for we 
belmffit 1 to make the town patent, 2 and yet it was force to us 
to yield thereto for near an inoneth before there was na vital 
in the town, but that that was given furs of the castle, 
quharby we put the castle in great danger, and for safety of the 
tan behuffit to quite the tother. 3 

We have referred all differences between our enemies and 
us to the ambassador of France and the Queen of England, 
for to your and our enemies we will yield nothing. We mon* 
on force take sik apointement as they will prescribe, because 
we have na moyen to bear out the cause as we wald. We 
have na assister in this realm, nor hes had this twelfemonth, 
but only the Erie of Huntley and ourselves, all other hes left 
us lang syne, or rather thay did us na good turn. 

Your Majestic mon provide some way for safety of the castle 
of Edinbourgh, and furnishing thereof, for it is the mark 
our adversars always shotis at, and they will spare nothing 
outlier be micht or sliced 5 to come be it, for they have ex- 
perience qwharof it may serve, and that it is ay able to cast the 
ball, as indeed it had put this matter lang syne out of play, 
gif France had played their part. We sallprovyde for the safety 
of it as weil as we may, but it will be baith costly and com- 
bersome ; and will require far mair expenses now qwhan our 
enemies hes the town at their devotion, nor it did before. 
It will not be a small thing will serve that turn, and ther- 
fore your Majestic mon with diligence provide a relief for it, 
and cause money be send to vital it for a yeir at lie, and 
furnis it with all provision necessar, as alswa 6 to maintain 
the garrison necessary, for sa lang as the castle is preserved 
the cause will not perish. I refer the rest to your Majestic' s 
discretion. God knows what burdein we have borne, for the 



1 Behooves. 2 Open. 3 For safety of the one it behoved 

to quit the other. 4 Must. 5 Alight or slight. 

6 Also. 



43'2 THE EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND. [AUG. 

furnishing of all the charges of this war lies onely lyne on 
our shoulders, qwherby we have beggerit ourselfes and all the 
freinds we had credit of. 

I wold wishe your Majestic, seinghow slack a part France 
hes tane l with you, suld essay yet be all meanes gif ye may 
wonne the Quene of England, for I see not be quhat other 
meanes your releif can be wrocht, and it may be gif ye make 
hir good offers, she will now schaw you mair favour nor sche 
did quhan ye had ma freindis. Sa we maist humbly kiss your 
Majestie's handes. From Edinbourg Castel, the 10th of 
August. Send us word quhat ye wald have done, and your 
commandementis sail be obeyed. 



SIR THOMAS GARGRAVE* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My bounden duty humbly remembered to your Honor, it 
may please the same to be advertised, that so farre as may 

1 Taken. 

* The President of the Council at York. See p. 274. 

The Earl of Northumberland was delivered by Morton for a sum of 
money to the English, who, since the discovery by the letters in Lord 
Seaton's ship, of the practises for his escape into Flanders, had been 
more eager to obtain possession of him. He was immediately con- 
veyed to York, condemned of high treason, and executed there on the 
22nd of August. A ballad on his delivery to the English is printed in 
Percy's Reliques. 

In MS. Cotton. Calig. B. iv. p. 243, are preserved the following 
verses by a partisan of the Earl : 

The copie of a ryme made by one Singleton, a Gentleman of Lancashire, now 
Prisoner at York for Religion. 

A dolefull time of weping tears 

To woefull plaintes do best agree, 
But nowe suche time my song requires 

As never erst was wont to be. 
Such heavie hap of cruell spite 
More than my hand and pen can write. 



1572.] DEATH OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 433 

appear by any talk or doings of the late Earl of Northum- 
berland, at or before his death, he continued obstinate in 
religion, and declared he would die a Catholic of the Pope's 



I loathe to tell howe now of late 
That cruel Scotland hath procured 

The slander of their realm and state 
By promise broken most assured : 

Which shameful act from mind of man 

Shall not depart, do what they can, 

The noblest Lord of Percie kind, 
Of honour and possessions fair, 

As God to him the place assigned, 

To Scottish ground made his repair ; 

Who, after promise manifold, 

Was last betrayed for English gold. 

Who shall hereafter trust a Scott, 
Or who will do that nation good, 

That so themselves do stain and blott 
In selling of such noble blood, 

Let Lords of this a mirror make, " 

And in distress that land forsake, 

Their lords and limmors are forlorn, 
Their people cursed of each degree, 

Their faith and promise all to-torne, 
And rumour ring it to the sky, 

How they for money sold their gest 

Unto the shambles like a beast. 

Loughleven now is lost for aye, 
Sith Duglasse did so foul a dede ; 

Thus will all men hereafter say ; 
When we are gone they shall it rede, 

That Scotland is a cursed ground, 
. The like I know cannot be found. 

The Pearcie's stork, an ancient foe 
To Scottish lowndes in field, 

Yet did he still relieve their woe 
If once the man did yield 

Unto his Prince and contrie's praise, 

As noblemen have noble ways. 

VOL. I. 



434 DEATH OF NORTHUMBERLAND. [AUG. 

churche. He accompted his offences nothing, and espe- 
cially after he heard he should die, but before he seemed 
to confesse he had offended, and would greve lyke it, say- 
ing, he dyd that he dyd by compulsion, and for fear of his 
lyfe. 

He confessed he was reconcyled to the Pope : he affirmed 
the realme was in a schisme, and there all were sysmaticks, he 
said there was neither pity nor mercy. In his talk with dyvers, 
he named himselfe Simple Thome, and said, " Simple Thome 
must dye to set up cruel heresy." At his death he wished his 
brother to be of his religion,* and that if he had his lyvings 
he trusted he wold pay his detts, and helpe his children and 
servants. 

He dyd not there either pray for the Queue's Majestic, nor 
even wyshed her well, nor yet wold confesse he had offended 
her Majestic, wherat many was offended, and thought he had 
no dutiful consy deration of her Majestic, and on the other 
syde the stiff-necked Papists rejoiced much of his stedfast- 
ness in their crede of popish religion, f I beseeche the Al- 
mighty to preserve the Queue's Majestie, and all good subjects 
from their deceitfull and cruell practises, the which, in my 
opinion, they intend, if tyme wold serve. They have too 
muche lybertye and scope, and wax hard-hearted, wylfull, and 
stoborn. The Lord resist their malyce, and defend his 
elect and all the good and Christian people. 

And thus beseeching your Honor to beare with my bold- 

O cruel envie with thy stinge, 

O great desire of heapes ofgolde, 
Ye shulde before have weighed this thinge, 

The cause of mischiefe manifolde ; 
For envie makes men do amisse ; 
Croked covetise did all this. 

The Scottes have done the worst they maye, 

And now did frame some grief therefore, 
But whatsoever they thinke or saye .... 

* Sir Henry Percy. 

f Saunders says, that the Earle " suffered martyrdom." 



157-2.] AFFAIRS OF THE LOW COUNTRIES. 435 

nes, I cease to trouble you, humbly beseeching the Almighty 
long to preserve your good Lordship in health and honour. 
From York, in hast, the 23rd of August, 1572. 

Your Honor's ever humble to command, 

THOMAS GARGRAVE. 



THOMAS COTTON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

It hath pleased your Honour lately to send this bearer, 
Captain Pyckman, unto Sir Humfre Gilbert here, to impart 
your pleasure, the which in some part, (by reason of my place 
here,) I understand, and having of myself somewhat found, 
and rather of the better sort of inhabitants and rulers learned, 
thought I might presume to deliver unto your Honour my 
simple opinions. It may please your Honour to receive them 
as my dutiful and honest intent means them, and also 
that my boldness may be pardoned. 

More then thirty years paste, Grandevele, father to this 
Cardinal, counselled the Emperor Charles the Fifth, th'only 
way to get to be the Monarch of Christendom was to take 
away all the privileges of the Low Country. His continual 
occasions with France, Germany, and with the Turk, did 
so occupy him, as he could not have the time. 

King Philip succeeding, and not forgetting Grandevele's 
advise, hath followed it as appears by the sequel of his do- 
ings; first, to put to death the noblemen and rulers of the con- 
try, and next, to bring in the Spanish inquisition, knowing 
that these things being against their privileges, they would 
never suffer them, and in withstanding of them to be found 
as rebels and traitors, by reason whereof, the King to have 
the commodity to drive away a great number of the inhabi- 
tants, and to confiscate there goods, as it appears. And 
to those that remain, take away their privileges, which shall 
be another inquisition, as first the hundredth penny, then the 

F F 2 



436 AFFAIRS OF THE LOW COUNTRIES. [AUG. 

thirtye, then the twentye, and lastely, the tenthe, which 
tirannously the Duke of Alva wolde have taken. 

By this means, if they were not content, (as he well knew 
they wolde not,) then they to be banyshed, and their goodes 
confiscated, and so to bringe the whole contrye into the forme 
of a newe province, and in th'ende to make it as another 
Nova Spania. It may appeare so, when the Spanyardes wyll 
not stycke to tell them the Kinge hath given them unto 
them and their contrye. Of the other parte, if they suffer 
him to enjoy this imposition (as it semeth he shall without 
greate helpe) by due accompte of men of beste judgment, in 
Flanders, his yerely benefyt shal be seventene millions of 
golde. With this great revenue (accompanyed with his con- 
quering mynde) he shall have commoditie to make warres with 
her Majestie's realme of England, as the King of Spaine hath 
often times threatened. If Englande sholde take lack, France 
is next. This hath principally moved, as the wiser sort of 
men say here, her Majestic and the King of France to make 
that perfect league. I may not saye the Kinge of France hath 
sent those greate number of Frenche which are now at Mouns, 
with the Count Lodwick, and that there are great numbers 
loked for, neither yet the Frenche King to make warrs with 
Spaine, considering the league. The Kinge of Spaine hath 
required the King of France to call home his people, and 
that he suffer no more to go to the ayde of the Prince or 
court. I do heare of greate preparation in France, which 
dothe prognosticate (as here we say) warrs with the Duke of 
Alva. 

All these thinges (if I may speak without offence) I think 
not unfit for her Majestic to consyder, to th'ende, if so her 
Hyghnes with your Honor thought good, some present 
meanes myght be used to helpe the poor Prince of Orenge, 
as the Frenche King doth, wherby now that may be gone 
through with, that her Majestie's realme may have great 
safty of so strong an enemie promised, or at the leaste the 
towne of Flosshinge, which importeth her Highnes muche. 



1572.] AFFAIRS OF THE LOW COUNTRIES. 437 

My reasons are, the town being had (which treason hath 
crossed) may be made strong, and the land being once 
won, a staple to be made there or at Middleborough, great 
occasion of the use of navigation. The commodity of our 
countries uttered, an import to be put whereby great common 
ditties to arise. Her Majestic, the only commander of the 
narrow seas ; hereby no shipes can come out of Denmark or 
Swethelande. Her enemies hereby shall be the weaker. 
Spain to have the greatest cause of navigation taken away, 
by reason of the trade in Flanders, where there is no haven for 
road in winter ; but only Soffery by this land of Celande. 1 
I wold be loathe Spain should range in tirrany there where 
her Majestic hath so good footing, and better should have 
had (or else we would have bought it dear) if one of us 
might have assured the other safety without suspect. 

I do not like France in policy to have it, whom we have 
been and now are jealous of here, the which ifEnglande fore- 
see not, God grant necessity makes them not to call them 
for their only patron. I hear it, wherefore the more I fear it. 
As for any particular persuasions herein, I am not able, more 
then that I know Sir Humfre Gilbert will wisely, and with 
great consideration, advise your Honour of. This only thing 
I most humbly beseech you to remember, not to omit any 
one hour, in granting such present commodity as may be 
thought necessary for the cause. The time is far spent. Cap- 
taine Pyckman is very well able to inform your Honour of our 
estate here. I most humbly crave pardon for this my bolde- 
nes, and withal take my leave, beseeching God to bring to 
pass those things your Honour most desires. 

From Flosshinge, the 23rd of August, 1572. 

Your Honor's most humble at command, 

THOMAS COTTON. 

1 Zealand. 



488 MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW. [SEPT. 

THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

These evill tymes trouble all good men's heads, and make 
their heartes ake, fearing that this barbarous treacherie* will 
not cease in Fraunce, but will reache over unto us. Neither 
feare we the mangling of our body, but we sore dread the 
hurte of our heade, for therm consisteth our life and safetie. 
We shall dutifullie praie, give you good advise, and God, I 
trust, will delyver us out of the mouthe of the roaring lyon. 
The citizens of London in these dangerous daies had need 
prudentlie to be dealt withall ; the preachers appoynted for 
the crosse t in this vacation are but yonge men, unskilfull in 
matters politicall, yet so carried with zeale, that they will 
enter into them and poure forthe their opinions. If the 
league standeth firme betwixte her Majestic and the Frenche 
King, (as I suppose it dothe,) they maye perhappes, being 
not directed, utter speache to the breache therof ; howe that 
will be lyked of I dowte. If I may receave from your Lord- 
ship some direction or advise herin, I will not faile to directe 
them so well as I can. The Deane of Paules and I will first 
occupie the place, giving example howe others may fol- 
lowe. 

Sundrie have requyred a publique faste and praier to be 
had, for the confounding of these and other cruel enemies of 
Godd's gospell, but this I will not consent unto, without 
warrant from her Majestic. 

Thus am I bolde to unfolde a piece of my mynde on the 
sudden, and to make you partaker of my simple cogitations, 
knowing that according to your olde wonte, you will take 
the same in good parte. Hasten her Majestic homewards,! 

* The infamous massacre perpetrated on St. Bartholomew's day, 
the 24th of August, twelve days before the date of this letter. 

t St. Paule's Cross, whence at this time the preachers addressed the 
multitude in the open air. 

$ She was now on a progress, in which she visited Havering Bower, 
the sea* of the Earl of Oxford, Theobalds, Gorhambury, the seat of 



1572.] MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW. 439 

her safe return to London will comfort many hearts op- 
pressed with fear. God preserve you, and direct you with 
his spirit to counsel to his glory. 

In haste, from my hows at Fulham, this 5th of September, 

1572. 

Your Lordship's humble at commandment, 

ED. LONDON.* 

Sir Nicholas Bacon, Dunstable, Woburn, the seat of the Earl of Bed- 
ford, Warwick, Kenilworth, Compton, Berkeley Castle, and Wood 
stock, at which latter place she is said to have received the intelligence 
of the massacre of Paris. From Woodstock she came by Reading to 
Windsor. 

* With this letter the Bishop sent a paper with the following sug- 
gestions for the safety of the state, at this alarming crisis, remarkable 
for being the first direct proposition we know for the execution of 
Mary Queen of Scots. 

The safety of our Queen and Realm, if God will. 

1. Forthwith to cut of the Scottish Quene's head : ipsa est 
nostri fundi calamitas. 

2. To remove from our Queen papists, arid such as by private per- 
suasion overthrow good counsel. 

3. The Quene's Majesty to be guarded strongly with Protestants, 
and others to be removed. 

4. Order must be taken for the safe keeping of the Tower, and for 
good order to be had in London; for strengthening of the city, and 
that they receive no Papists of strength to sojourn there this 
winter. 

5. A firm league to be made with the young Scottish King, and 
the Protestants there. 

6. A league to be made with the Princes Protestants of Germanie, 
offensive and defensive. 

7. The chief Papists of this realm are to be shut uppe in the 
Tower, and the Popish old Bishoppes to be returned thither. 

8. The gospel earnestly to be promoted, and the church not bur- 
dened with unnecessary ceremonies. 

9. The Protestants, which only are faithful subjects, are to be 
comforted, preferred, and placed in authority. The papists to be 
displaced. 

These put in execution would turn to Godde's glory, the safety of 
the Quene's Majesty, and make the realm flourish and stand. 



440 LIBELLOUS REPORTS. [SEPT. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Sir, I wrote to your Honor private letters in amaritudine 
animae et in insipientia meet. I trust ye do not beare me 
any displeasure for them, and before Almighty God I speake 
it, no creature in earthe knoweth of this or for that my par- 
ticular wryting to you. I have that persuasion that ye love 
her Highnes, and with this persuasion, whatsoever subtle re- 
spectes be in some others, the truth is, as wel for Almighty 
God's commandement, for that she is nowe my prynce, as for 
the last wordes that ever her Majestie's mother spake to me 
concerning her, being her poore countryman, I have as muche 
cause to wishe wel to her Majestic as any other whatsoever, 
so wil I be, whatsoever cometh of it. If I be in any error, I 
can be glad to be otherwise advertised to change my fearful 
opynion toward her, and, Sir, because I feare one other thing, 
I will open it to your Lordship, and do with it what ye 
think best. I am, I thinke, credibly informed, that the mayor 
of Dovyr brought up a strange body to be examined, of whom 
I heare that because your Lordship could have no leisur (as 
I am sure ye be carefiily and thoroughly occupyed) ye com- 
mitted th'examination to Mr. Sommer and to this Mayor, 
and he hathe it in wryting, that this villain should utter most 
shamefull wordes agaynst her, viz., that th'Erle of Leicester 
and Mr. Hattonf should be suche toward her, as the matter is 
so horrible, that they wold not wryte down the wordes, but 
wold have uttered them in speeche to your Lordship if ye 
wold have been at leisur. Furthermore he should saye, that 
a brother of his in Calice should affirme that within this wynter 



* See Strype's Life of Parker, for further instances of the deep im- 
pression which the news of the French massacre made on the mind 
of the Archbishop and others, who all joined in the desire of the 
Bishop of London that Mary should be put to death. 

t Sir Christopher Hattori. 



1572.] A TREASURE LEGEND. 441 

he trusted to hear of as many throats cut here in England, 
as be reported to be in France, and he should say, " what 
make ye of the persecutions of Queen Mary ?" for within 
this twelvemonth he dowted not but that Henrye's bones 
and masters Elizabethe's too should be openly burned in 
Smythfield : and further I hear that this person is yet de- 
lyvered, and sent home to London again, to the service of 
his friends. Sir, if this be true, God be merciful to us, I 
can say no more, as Mardocheus, I hear and understand, 
which I pray God turn to her honour, but I can not do 
any less in conscience, but to unburden myself, and pour 
it into your bosom, and her Majestic wills me to write 
all to you. God defend her Majestic, and all her trusty 
friends. 



JOHN WOGAN* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My duty most humbly premised unto your good Lord 
ship, whereas it is my duty, being sheriff of this shire, to 
advertise her Majestic or some of her Highness most hono- 
rabble counsel of every thing or cause which doth concern 
her Majestic' s commodity by any manner of means, 
therefore these are to advertise your Honour, that I am cre- 
dibly informed, and the report is notorious, that about 
Easter last, Jevan Canton, Morris Hurt, and Thomas 
Probert, of this county of Pembroke, have found at an old 
pair of walls at Spittell, in the said county, a great quan- 
titie of treasure, gold and silver, contained in a certain 
work of brass, as is supposed, and that they had know 



* Sheriff of Pembrokeshire. This is not the only treasure story 
which will be given among these letters, as illustrative of the super- 
stitions of the time. It must not be forgotten that the famous Dr. 
Dee petitioned to have the finding of all hidden treasures throughout 
the kingdom, by means of the art magical. 



442 A TREASURE LEGEND. [SEPT. 

ledge thereof, by the advertisement of one Syr Lewis,* a 
preste dwelling in Carmerthenshire, not farre from Kayo. 

The presumption is greate, as may appeare by the varietie 
of their owne confessions, token before me, and by the circum- 
stance of the deposition of others before me also examined, 
specially of two, the one of the age of eightene yeares, the 
other of sixtene yeres, named John Canton and Thomas 
Canton, bothe brethren to the forenamed Jevan Canton, 
one of the parties charged with the saide threasure trove. 

And myself with others repaired to the place, and founde 
the walles broken with engynes, and a place within the cen- 
tre of the wall, contayning one foote square, fytte for such a 
work, and the soille and ruste of the worke had made black 
the circumferens of the place. So that it is moste evident 
that suche a work they founde, which is thought to have 
continued there these two hundreth yeres. For further con- 
sideration wherof, I have sent unto your Honor the deposi- 
tions of such as were examined before me ; and am ready for 
my parte to execute your Lordship's farther commandement 
in this matter, or any other cause wherein I may do your 
Lordship any service. But I gather that the truth of this 
matter will never be bolted out, without that the prieste be ex- 
amined, and the parties also menaced with some torture or 
extremitie, all which I remit to your Lordship's further di- 
rection, and for thys tyme do most humbly take my leave of 
your good Lordship. 

Written at Wiston, the 10th day of September, 1572. 
Your Lordship's most assured and poore 

kynsman at commandemente, 

JOHN WOGAN. 



* Sir, as applied to a clergyman, was the translation of Dominus ; 
it properly belonged to a bachelor of arts, who was addressed by 
that name up to a comparatively recent period. At this time popish 
priests were generally suspected of being conjurors, and many of them 
seem to have laid claim to that honour. 



1572.] MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW. 443 

LORD W. HOWARD* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, understanding that this bringer was 
to repair unto the court, I wold not suffer him to depart 
from hence without these few lines unto your Lordship, 
albeit I had little, or rather no matter at all, to write. 

I do suppose I should have heard from your Lordship ere 
this, but that your busynes (which must needs be great in 
this dangerous time) hath been the let thereof. Very gladly 
wold I understand what advertisements be sent unto you, for 
I hear many tales spread abroad the country here ; and 
therefore I am the more desirous to understand truly of such 
news as you have there. If your leisure will permytt you to 
impart them privately unto me, I shall greatly think myself 
beholden to you. My Lord Chamberlain (I dare say) will 
not deny you a groom of the chamber to carry your letters, 
so that you shall not excuse yourself by the want of a mes- 
senger, which you may have at your commandment ; for I do 
remember that counselors in time past being in estimation, 
and absent from the court, have ben advertised of such oc- 
currents as has happened there. Thus being always bold 
to trouble your Lordship, I commit you to God. 

At my poor house in Reigatt, the 18th of September, 1572. 
Your Lordship's assured friend, 

W. HOWARD. 



ARTHUR LORD GREY OF WILTON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, this morning I received your letter, 
wherein your Lordship doth most truly guess of th'encrease 
of my grief by the late horrible and tyrannical dealings in 
France, and with your Lordship I do pray to God that her 
Majestic may have the wisdom to follow and magni- 
tude to execute the things that may divert the same from 
hence. 

* William, Lord Howard, of Effingham Lord Privy Seal. 



444 VARIOUS NEWS. [OCT. 

Where your Lordship wolde knowe the tyme that last yere 
I shoulde be wrytten unto to have taken the chardg of Ire- 
lande, I was never by letters directly wylled therunto. All 
that by writing tending therunto I receaved, was from my 
Lord of Leicester, the 9th of August, the courte then lying at 
Hattfield, wherin his Lordship dyd seeme but to give me an 
inckling of that to be the cause of my sending for: other letter 
I receaved not. 

So praying your Lordship not to thynk hym idle, that is 
diversly opprest with care, but to suffer hym fyrst to be quiett 
in mynde, before you put hym to any further care of servyce, 
I humbly take my leave for this tyme. 

From Whaddon, this 19th of September, anno 1572. 
Your Lordship's moste assuredly, 

A. GREY. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY.* 

My very good Lord, to this commission of the cownsell in 
the north, altho I said it came from you, I cannot get her 
Majestie's hand. After all other excuses, she said she was 
not wont to signe such thinges, except some bodie's hand 
were to it, that all were well conceived, and as it was wont. 
I do well perceive her Highnes is disposed to signe nothing, 
except your Lordship be here 

The day that you went from hence, after that I had dis- 
patched into France and to Mr. Killegrew,*!' after dynner I 
sent to King, the knight marshalnian, to come to Mr. Trea- 
surer and me. When he came he was axed for Grene the 
priest, who was committed to his charge. He said your 

* Mr. Thomas Smith was now Secretary of State. 

f Ambassador in Scotland, commissioned to negotiate between the 
government and Grange and Lethington, who still held Edinborough 
Castle, and who refused constantly to acknowledge the King's au- 
thority. 



1572.] VARIOUS NEWS. 445 

Lordship gave him a letter, and commanded that he should 
be carried with that letter to the Bishop of London. I said 
he mistoke the matter; I had the matters in my keeping which 
should charge him. and that my Lord of London, nor the 
commissioners, had neither information nor anything to do 
with him, he should be examined by other of the counsel 
and me, whereof Mr. Treasurer w r as also privy. And ther- 
upon Mr. Treasurer and I charged him forthwith to bring 
him hither again ; the which he said he wold do. This was 
upon Monday, about two or three of the clock after noon, 
sith which time to this day, which is Wednesday at three 
after none, I can hear no word of him, except that the Mar- 
shalhnen do make; but of the said Green we cannot hear. 
Her Majesty has been very sick this last night, so that my 
Lord of Leicester did watch with her all night. This morn- 
ing, thanks be to God ! she is very well. It was but a soden 
pang. I pray God long preserve her. These be shrewd al- 
arms. The letters to the three wardens anempst Scotland 
be written by the advise of the Lord Honsdon, and sent. 
Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. 
From Wyndesor, the 15th of October, 1572. 

Your Lordship's always, 

T. SMITH. 



THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

With duty, these may be to advertise your honourable 
Lordship, that I did understand this present day by certain 
th'inhabitants of the town of Farnham, where I do remain, 

* Robert Horn, a native of Durham, made Bishop of Winchester Feb. 
10, 1560. He had previously been Dean of Durham. In the Latin life of 
Archbishop Parker, he is lauded as " Fire animo magno et ingenio pro 
fundo, et in olfaciendis adversariorum technis non minus sagax, quam 
in antevertendis evitandisque prudence." He dieJi in 1589. 



446 SCANDALOUS SPEECHES. [DEC. 

of certaine lewde words and speeche uttered within these 
two or three dayes by one John Brabant of the saide towne, 
clothier, a man of better countenance than condition, and more 
endued with welthe, than well-affected to religion or the 
state, as maie seme by his words, who coming in place 
where certaine of his neighbours were reasoning of the Scrip- 
tures and of the late Duke of Norfolk, as it might seme, first 
saide upon occasion that some of them spake of ranke papists, 
that there were good papists, and there were evil protes- 
tants ; and also sayde upon further communication, that the 
late Duke of Norfolk was neither papist nor traytor ; and 
that if the saide Duke were nowe alive he should not die. 
Of which his lewde speeche, openlie spoken, seeming to 
carry discredit to the Prince and the noblemen who dealt in 
that matter, I thought my bounden dutie to certyfy your 
Honour, beseching that I may have understanding of your 
pleasure concerning him. And thus I humbly take my leave. 
From Farnham Castell, the 18th daie of November, 1572. 
Your honorable Lordship's to commande, 

ROBERT WINTON. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Where your Lordship sente unto me by Mr. Deane of 
Westminster, your desire to have Saunders' book * answered, 
your Honor shall understande that I have taken care thereof, 
and have labored certaine men which be at good leisure to do 
somewhat, and for a shewe to be firste sente owte to the 
reader both Englishe and strange, * I have appointed the con- 
futation of so muche as concerneth the honor and state of the 

* Nicholas Saunders' book De Visibili Monarchia. See Strype's 
Life of Parker. Dr. Clerk's answer was published under the title, 
" Fidelis servi subdito infideli Responsio/' without the name of the 
writer. 

i Foreign. 



1572.] JOHN DAY THE PRINTER. 447 

realm, the dignity and legitimation of our Prince, with just 
defence of King Henrie's honour, Queue Anne's,* and partly 
your own, as by name you be touched, a page. 686 unto page. 
739. I have committed it to Mr. D. Clarke, who is of late 
Doctor of Law at Cambridge, and for his more estimation, I 
have honested him with a room in the Arches, who shall I 
doubt not but sufficiently deal in the matter, and he shall 
not want my advise and diligence. As for some particular 
matters which be not knoweii to me, I trust to have your 
counsel furthermore to the better accomplishment of this 
work, and other that shall follow. 

I have spoken to Day f the printer, to caste a new Eta 
lian letter, which he is doing, and it will cost him forty 
marks, and loathe he and other printers be to print any Latin 
book, because they will not here be uttered, and for that 
books printed in England be in suspicion abroad. 

Now, Sir, Day hath complained to me that, dwelling in a 
corner, and his brotherne envying him, he cannot utter his 
books which lie in his hand, two or three thousand pounds' 
worth. His friends have procured of Pawles a lease of a little 
shop to be set up in the church yard,J and it is confirmed. 
And what by the instant request of some envious booksellers, 
the Mayor and Aldermen will not suffer him to set it up in 
the churche-yarde, wherein they have nothing to do but by 
power. This shop is but little and lowe, and leaded flatt, 
and is made at his great cost to the sum of forty or fifty 
pounds, and is made like the terrace, fair railed and posted, 

Anne Boleyn, the mother of Queen Elizabeth. 

t John Day, celebrated as the printer of Fox's Martyrology, was 
born of a respectable family at Dunwich, in Suffolk, and began print 
ing at London, in 1546. In Mary's reign he was imprisoned, but after- 
wards fled beyond the sea. He died at Walden, in Essex, July 23, 
1584. By his two wives he had twenty-six children. See a very in- 
teresting life of this zealous printer, by Mr. J.G. Nicholls, in the Gen- 
tleman's Magazine, Nov. 1832. 

I These shops were built up against the walls of the church. 



448 EARL OF WORCESTER SENT TO FRANCE. [JAN. 

fitt for men to stande uppon in any triumph or shewe, and can 
in no wise either hurte or deface the same. And for that you 
of the councell have written to me and other of the com- 
mission to helpe Daie, &c., I praie your Lordship to move 
the Queue's Majestic to subscribe her hand to these or such 
letters, that all this entendment may the better go forward, 
wherin your Lordship shall deserve well both of Christe's 
church, and of the prince and state, &c. I praie your Lord- 
ship to respite the said Dr. Clarke in that worke which we 
have spoken to him for, that this may be the sooner done. 

And thus God preserve your Honour in better healths than 
I in a naughtie body feele in this harde winter. At Lambeth, 
the 13th of December. 

Your Honor's loving frende, 

MATTHUE CANTUAR. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, your hasty going hence hath made, as 
appeareth, all thyngs here to turne backwards. I had some- 
what ado to get to the Queene, and more to get anythyng 
signed. Yet I have gotten the letter to the King, the 
Queene, the Queene Mother, and the Queene of Navarre, 
which he* should carie, signed ; but neither could I get the 
warrants for his diets signed, nor his passport. Th'one is 
but differred for the other, because it is six pounds per 
diem. Her Majestic saith it is more then was wont, and I 
that it was but as my Lord Admirall's, and that an Earle had 
never less. Her Majestic replied, that my Lord Admirall 

* The Earl of Worcester, who was going into France to represent 
the Queen at the christening of Maria Elizabeth, only daughter of 
Charles IX., who was born on the 28th Oct. 1572, and lived only six 
years. 



1573.] ELIZABETH AND THE DUKE OF ALENC.ON. 449 

was of the counsel.* In fine, she wold have it differed 
whiles your Lordship come hither. 

For Dr. Dale, she will in no wise meddle with anything of 
his, and it was that wherefore she wold have spoken agayii 
with you. Her Majestic saith, your Lordship knows her 
mind, and that there are matters betwixt the Dukef and her, 
that you only and Mr. Walsingham knows, and like 
wise of all the proceedings as hath passed in this matter from 
the beginning, the which a stranger cannot so soon under 
stand. Then again, she likes the wisdom and discretion 
of my lord ambassador J now in handling of those matters ; 
and this is but a simple man, and she likes not that he 
should deal in them further, her Majestic wold you should 
call to you Mrs. Walsingham, and persuade her to be content 
for a month or two, and by that time this matter wold come 
to some end. 

I said, if never so much hast were made, it wold be a 
month before my Lord of Worcester should return, or made 
an end of his message. And that the poor gentleman there 
was undone, having been at so great charges, and now all 
things waxing so dear ; and his wife being here and great 

* Lord Burghley, in his notes of occurrences, has entered carefully 
the different allowances to ambassadors. At the commencement of 
the reign, Lord William Howard, as is here stated, went to Flan 
ders " with 61. diet per diem. 1 ' On the 12th Jan. 1559-60, was "Sir 
Tho. Chamberlain sent into Spain to remain ambas. leiger, with 60*. 
per diem diet." July 28, 1560, " Sir William Cecil came to Green- 
which from Scotland, so as he was absent sixty-three days, having had 
4,1. per diem, in toto 252/. and for postage, with twenty horses from 
London to Edinburgh, and from thence back to London, 117/." In 
October, 1561, " Sir Thomas Chaloner, sent as ambassador into Spain, 
with 31. 6s. 8d. diet." In July, 1563, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was 
sent into France, and Jan. 1566-7, Mr. Man into Spain, with the same 
diet, which seems to have been the regular allowance for ordinary am- 
bassadors. 

t The Duke of Alenfon, younger brother of the Duke of Anjou, who 
was now proposed as a match for Elizabeth. 

$ Sir Francis Walsingham. 
VOL. I. G G 



450 EMBASSY TO FRANCE. [JAN. 

with child. " It is trew," saith her Majesty, " I hear say he 
hath sold an hundred marks a year land, and his wife is al- 
most out of her witts for sorrowe ; but," saith she, " my Lord 
must persuade her. It shall not be past for a moneth or 
two, or not so long : and so I pray you to write to my Lord 
by and by." 

I wold have had her Majestic signe Mr. Dale's dispache 
streight, saying it was ready, and have kept it still, or left it 
with me, untill her Highnes thought good to send hym. It 
wold not be ; and I perceive untill that your Lordship come 
agayn, there will be no good done. I said there were other 
things to be done, beside all these instructions, what my 
Lord should say, if any of these thyngs were demanded of 
hym, whereof De la Motte spake to her Highnes, as of the 
Vidame and Montgomery,* and other Frenchmen which be 
here, and also of the marriage with the Duke. So her Majestic 
told me of them somewhat, not much unlyke to that which I 
had contrived ; the which I entred to bryng into my note 
against your Lordship's returne. But I perceive untill you 
returne nothyng wil be done. But in no wise wold her Ma- 
jesty that Dr. Dale go with my Lord,f but after ; although 
surely, in my mynd, it were better he went with hym ; and 
my Lord of Worcester must take his leave on Saturday or 
Sonday, and take his jorney on Monday, as her Majesty 
supposeth, and her Majesty wold that your Lordship should 
gather a short collection, how the matter of marriage hath 
passed from the first begynning for the Duke of Anjou till 
now, that it may appere that the Quene-mother must first 
make answer resolutely touching the matter of religion, be- 
fore her Majesty should precede any further. 

* The Vidame of Chartres, and Gabriel, Count of Montgomery, had 
the preceding summer escaped with great difficulty in the massacre of 
Paris, and had sought refuge in England. Montgomery went to the 
aid of Rochelle this year, and in 1574, joining the protestants, who 
were in arms in Normandy, he was taken prisoner and put to death. 

f The Earl of Worcester. 



1573.] LORD BURGHLEY ABSENT FROM COURT. 451 

This is all that is hitherto done. And so I commit your 
Lordship to the Almighty God. From Hampton Court, the 
7th of Jan. 1572, by English account.* 

Your Lordshipp's always at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I once again have moved the Queue's 
Majestic for Mr. Dale's going, and still she saith there are 
other matters betwixt her Highness and the Duke, which 
it is not fit that Dale should be made privy unto. Howsoever 
the matter is, I know not the reason, but I perceive as yet 
neither his preparation, nor his loss which he is like to sus- 
teyne, nor the grief of Mr. Walsingham, can make her Ma- 
jesty sign anything that appertains to his going. Indeed 
I wished your Lordship here at home before my Lord of 
Worcester's departing, to th'intent that you might have per- 
suited that Dr. Dale might go with his Lordship. You 
should have done a very good deed. I perceive her Majestic 
had rather you should tarry out a while, then he should go over 
at this time. " Why," saith she, " I beshrew you, why did 
you send for him ? " te Mary," quoth I, " madam, I did wish 
he were here at the departing, or before, of my Lord of Wor- 
cester, to make perfect all things first that ways into France, 
and then with my Lord of Desmondf into Ireland." " Why," 
saith her Highness, " I knew before he wold take physic at 
London, and then recreate himself a while at Tongs : I be- 

* According to which account the year began on the 25th of March, 
instead of the 1st of January, as it was then reckoned in France, 

t The Earl of Desmond and Sir John, his brother, rebelling in 1567, 
had been brought prisoners into England. They were this year taken 
back to Ireland by Sir Edward Fitton, and imprisoned at Dublin, but 
they soon after broke out of prison. 

G G2 



452 THE FRENCH PROTESTANTS. [JAN. 

shrew you for sending for hym ! " " There is no hurt done," 
quoth I, madam ; " I will send hym word agayn this night 
what your Majestic doth saye, and I thynk then he will not 
be hasty to come, altho I wold wish hym here." 

And then I said, " I had begun some instructions for my 
Lord of Worcester, if any such questions were axed of hym ; 
for such a nobleman ambassador may not seeme to be dumb 
or ignorant of your Highnes' pleasure in such thinges as may 
be axed. Otherwise," quoth I, (( I thynk it be not your Ma- 
jesty's pleasure that he should meddle in them, that is, for 
the French that be here, for the mariage, for the trafique." 
All these her Majestic liked well, saying that she wold have 
the mariage first. For Scottland and Hume Castle I had 
but begun, so I had of her Highnes further instructions. I 
shewed also her Majestic Hawkyns' letter. The prorogation 
of the Parliament, and the pardon for Florence, I have got 
signed, and little els. The prorogation I send your Lordship 
here inclosed. Her Majestic willed me farther to tell you, 
that Conte Montgomery and Vidame were here with her 
Highnes, and wold that her Majesty should send Hawkyns, 
or some other, by some colour, with some munition of powder 
to Rochell, as driven thither by tempest or contrary winds. 
But she saith, she cannot tell how to do it, especially being 
already spoken to by the French ambassador not to aid. Her 
Majesty praies you to think of it, and devise how it may be 
done, for she thynks it necessary ; and if it were done, Conte 
Montgomery possible would end his life there, beyng weary 
of this idle lyfe here. With your presence, I thynk veryly 
you might have persuaded her Majestic that Dr. Dale should 
go nowe. Possibly you may do it by your letters. Y our 
Lordship shall do a good dede to two, the one to go, the 
other to come home. For the love of God essay it ! All 
thyngs be ready and lacke but signing. 

As for the Erie of Worcester, I hope I shall do well enough. 
For th' Erie of Desmond, if your Lordshippe remember any 
more things to be done, as of the writings, the copies 



1573.] THE EARL OF DESMOND. 453 

whereof he should have with him to be indented at De- 
velyn, 1 whereof I have only one ; or if there be any other 
thing, which your Lordship do remember; let me have 
a word by answer, and I shall see it done, if I can. 

Thus I commit your Honour to Almighty God. From 
Hampton Court, the 8th of Jan. 1572, by English ac- 
count. 

Your Lordshipp's always at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 

TV Erie of Desmond hath been before her Majesty, whom 
her Highness likes well for his playnenes, and hath good 
hope of his truth and constancy. To Sir John I perceive 
she gave a privy nip, that as he hath a good wit, so he 
should hereafter use it well. He, like one not unwise nor 
unexpert, craved pardon, if any thing heretofore were amiss, 
all should be amended. This her Majesty wold I should 
show you, that you might give him a good lesson, when he 
takes his leave of you : and understand that her Highness 
shall always understand of all his doings. Her Majesty 
told me she wold give th'erle apparel, and some gentle 
remembrance at his going away, which is very honourable 
and princely to do, and some comfort and amends for his 
long imprisonment. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, the Queue's Majestic hath not been 
yesterday, nor to-day, much disposed to go abroad, nor to 
give audience, and therefore I could not by Mr. Blithe send 
any word unto you as I wold. 

As touching Monsieur the Duke of Alanson, and all such 
maters, 1 perceive her Highness liked very well the answers 

1 Dublin. 



454 THE EARL OF DESMOND. [JAN. 

which I made in the instructions, which I read unto her ; 
and that is enough for that matter untill further occasion be 
offred then is now likely. 

I recited unto her Highnes the sum of Mr. Killegrew's let- 
ters, with the occurrents, and how the state standeth there, 
and I perceive her Majestie thynks mete he should now be 
revoked, but yet she wold not commande me to write his re- 
vocation. Nevertheles, I wyll be ready with it in a minute, 
and move it once agayn. 

Her Majesty perceiveth well, that the Castillians* loke 
for aide of money, and to have Monsieur le Chevalier amonge 
them,t which no dowte wold be, if ones Rochell were at that 
poynt as the French wysheth. But I trust before that tyme, 
they of the castell shall yeld or do worse, if it be true that 
Argile and Seton doth pretend. 

Th'Erle of Desmond is here, and I perceive the Quene's 
Majestie will give hym some silks for apparell, and some 
money in reward. I hope he will be a good, playne, and 
faithfull subject.]] He desires very much that th'Erle of 
Ormond might also go into Ireland with him, for he dowteth, 
when he hath driven all the rebels out of his country, 
(whereof he thynks himself sure soon to do,) they will fly 
to th'Erle of Ormond's brothers and th'Erle of Clanrickard's 
sons, all those yet rebels and not pardoned, nor assured 
of their lives, and so make more trouble in some one or other 
place, that he shall not be able to enjoy e that quiet, the which 
he doth desire, to make himself rich by it. 

* The party who held Edinborough Castle against the authority of 
the King and Regent. 

t The King of France was preparing secretly to send both men and 
money to the party of Grange and Lethington, and a large sum of 
money sent was intercepted by the other party at Blackness. Queen 
Elizabeth, not long after, knowing that the King of France was going 
to send men, sent some herself to reduce the castle, and so was before 
hand with him. 

* He proved quite otherwise. 



1573.] THE EARL OF CLANRICKARD. 455 

Your Lordship may do well to thynk of this matter for her 
Majestie's service, considering now the late wyldenes in 
the same English pale ; if I can have any opportunity, I will 
move her Majestic in it. I see no other copies needful to 
take out of your Lordship's book, then I have already, the 
which I have copied out; the rest methinks apertayneth 
rather to the controversy betwixt th'Erle of Ormond and 
him, and the orders already taken, the which, as they remain 
there, so, if need be, may at all times be sent over. 

I shall cause letters to be made for her Majesty, as you 
write, to the Lord Deputy, how th'Erle of Desmond and 
Sir John shall be ordered, and that nothing be done without 
the advise of Sir John Parrot first had. But her Majesty 
is so loath to sign anything, that I wot not what to do. 

All th'Erle of Worcester's despatche is not yet signed, 
which has been ready this six days, and now he is upon his 
taking leave. And the counsel's letters for lent, and the 
naming of the commissioners for the musters I will do, so 
soon as may be, but here be now very few counsellors. 

Mr. Liveried, my Lord Deputie' s man, promised to come 
to me for my letters to my Lord Deputy, but I have not yet 
heard of him since. They have been ready this four days. 
I wold not that my Lord Deputy should reckon me un 
kind, and not to write unto him by his man. If I knew 
where he were, I wold send my letters unto him. If he be 
gone, then I must send them by Mr. Fitton. 

Betwixt him and th'Erle of Clanrikard,* I intend to send 
with my Lords of the counseli's letters, both the Erie's books 

* Sir Edward Filton was Governor of Conn aught, and his govern 
meant being somewhat rigorous, drove the sons of the Earl of Clan 
rickard into rebellion. The Earl, their father, went to the Lord 
Deputy to declare his innocence in the whole transaction, and pre- 
scented a book of articles against Fitton, as the cause of the insurrec- 
tion. Sir Edward Fitton sent his answers to them to the English 
council, who sent them away to the Lord Deputy and his council, 
that they might decide the difference between them. 



456 THE EARL OF CLANRICKARD. [JAN. 

and Sir Edward Fitton's answers, referring the decyding 
therof to my Lord Deputy and the counsel!. If th'Erle 
will nedes have the matters sifted to the full triall, then 
each one to make hymself party agaynst the other, and to 
say and prove the most and worst they can. 

Mary, if my Lords shall thynk so good, if the Deputy can 
persuade them both to wrap up all things by -past and to be 
friends, as they promised to be at their reconciliation before 
my Lord Deputy and the counsell, and to joyne faith- 
fully for the furtherance of the Quene Majestie's service, 
and quiet and good order of the contrey herafter, in my 
mynd it were the best way to treade all underfoote that hath 
gone heretofore, with a perpetuall a^orm, and to begyn 
a new lyfe, without grating upon old sores, and that for that 
matter. 

If my Lord Deputie's man be not gone, as I trust he 
be not, it were well done that the dispache to tell of th'Erle 
of Desmond's and his brother's coming over, and in what sort, 
went before, that Sir John Perrot may be advertised, and his 
mynd knowen, and so the Erie not to be long detayned in 
suspense at Develyng. For seeing the Quene's Majestic 
doth mynd to tye th'Erle to her service with a benefit, it 
shold be ample liberaliter et prolixe done, not maligne et 
parce, which doth so disgrace it, that for love, many tyme it 
leaveth a grudge behynd in the hart of hym which shold re- 
ceive it, that marrs the whole benefit. 

Thus I bid your Lordship most hartily farewell. 

From Hampton Courte, the 10th of Jan. 1572, by Englishe 
account. 

Your Lordshipp's allwais at commandemente, 

T. SMITH. 

I send your Lordship the warrant for the 1000 even now 
signed, and the pardon which my Lord Keper wrote for, 
signed yesterday. 



1573.] MASS-PRIESTS AND CONJURERS. 457 



THE EARL OF SHREWSBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I have received the box and the book, 
sent unto this Queen, with the letters from the French Am- 
bassador, conveyed all hither by Mr. Randolphe, which I 
have delivered unto her according to your letters that came 
therewith, perceiving by her that in the box was contained 
a pair of beeds of stone, a little book covered with black 
velvet, a cross of gold, and a letter from the Duchess of Guise. 
She said the box was opened, and that she wanted another 
book which she wrote for. But I did earnestly affirm unto 
her, that neither was the box opened, nor anything lacking 
by means of your Lordship. Then she showed herself much 
grieved that anything should come unto Mr. Randolph's 
hands, that should be sent unto her. The cause whereof 
(as I verily take it) is that she would have some express 
messenger to come, whereby she might get some intelligence 
according to her humour. She has presently written unto 
the Queue's Majestic, which I do send with her packet unto 
your Lordship, among other her letters, to be used as shall 
please her Majestic. 

Since my last letters unto your Lordship, I have caused 
diligent search to be made in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, 
and a part of Shropshire, by th'apprehension of the two 
scholars and others, of the wicked and cunning practises with 
Mr. John Revel ; but as far as I can understand yet they 
be all fled, saving one Every, servant unto Lakyn,* late 
sheriff of Salop ; who told some of my servants in his search 
ing, that the same Every was gone about business of his. 
Therefore Lakyn is to answer for him at his repair up, which 
is not to be omitted, for it is very like that Every can dis- 
cover very much matter, right necessary to be known. f 

* In a letter of Shrewsbury to the council, printed in Lodge, he 
is called " Rowland Lacon, of Willey, near Bridgenorthe." 

f There appears to have been a plot by certain " mass priests and 



458 MASS-PRIESTS AND CONJURERS. [JAN. 

In the seeking for these lewd persons, I caused my men to 
apprehend one Thomas Comberford, of Comberford, gent., 
where the said Revell made his most abode, and where masses 
were frequented, and also two masse priests, that have said 
so many masses, as appeare by confession, if lawe will take 
place, as I dare affirme will amount unto 10,000 marks at 
leaste. I wyshe that bishops, and others of authoritie in the 
countrey, wold have more regard unto their charge, and not 
suffer such dangerous vagabonds to rest unpunished in their 
jurisdictions. 

This said Revell, Comberford, and the two masse priests, 
I do presentlie send up unto your Lordship and the rest of 
the counsell. 

And because Gilbert Talbot, my sonne, cometh up to do his 
dutie, and about other business of myne, I have appointed him 

conjurers/' as they are called, to deliver the Scottish Queen. Revel 
was to have introduced himself into the service of the Earl of Shrews- 
bury, and the charmed plates of gold mentioned in this letter, with 
masses and conjurations to be said by the other complices, were to 
gain him the Earl's favour, as it seems, so that the latter would be de- 
prived of the power to injure their unlawful designs. In the letter of 
the Earl of Shrewsbury referred to in the last note, we have some fur- 
ther information on this subject. <e This Avery," he says, " upon 
myne examination, at the first wold nedes seem to be simple, playne, 
and utterly both innocent and ignorant of any lewd doings or practice, 
. either by himself or by any other person ; but, after sharper imprison- 
ment for one night, he confessed that he was a dealer with the con- 
jurers; and that he brought certain bookes of that arte unto John Revell, 
which the conjuring scholars named Palmer and Falconer, and Skyn- 
ner the priest did occupy in their practyse at the said Revell's house ; 
and he sayth further, that they conjured for divers causes, viz. for hid 
money, for helping a diseased, for knowing some secrete place to hide 
them, and to have certain knowledge also touching the state of this 
realme, whereby I gather that he can declare some further matter need- 
ful to be discovered." Feb. 1 st. 

Strype, in his Life of Sir Thomas Smith, has fallen into the curious 
oversight of supposing the Earl of Shrewsbury to be Lord President of 
the Council of the North, and to have arrested these mass priests and 
conjurers in that capacity. 



1573.] SIEGE OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. 459 

specially in charge to see them safely and severally conveyed 
up, without any conference or intelligence to be held amongst 
them. 

Thus I wish unto your Lordship as well as unto myself. 
From Shefeld Castle, the 20th of January, 1572. 

Your good Lordship's ever assured friend to my power, 

G. SHREWSBURY. 

This Queen informs me, that she hath given order for the 
satisfaction of the Scotsman mentioned in your last letter 
unto me. 

I thought good to send your Lordship the plates of gold, 
that the scholars made Revel believe to have virtue of getting 
my favour, and saving him from all perils, that ye may prize 
that jewel of virtue, and to show it unto her Majestic, if it 
be her pleasure. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I have moved the Queue's Majestic as 
touching th'aid of the Regent* at this time, for the reducing 
of Edinburgh Castle into the King's hands. Her Majestic 
told me of a devise she had to do this without any such 
charge, by a letter written to them, &c. I showed her Ma- 
jestic that it was but a protracting of time, and that which 
they desired. Now, the French being thoroughly occupied, 
is the best time to do that enterprise which is to be done. 

In fine, her Highness condescended to mine opinion, and 
showed herself very well pleased that your Lordship did make 
provision in this while to have powder and a ship of New- 
castle, and other things necessary provided before hand, for 
the doing, (as I told her Majestic your Lordship wold do,) 
and said that she thought on Saturday at night, or Sunday at 

* The Earl of Morton. 



460 MASS-PRIESTS AND CONJURERS. [FEB. 

the furthest, you wold be here, and then her Highnes wold 
fully determyne with you of all these matters to be set forward 
with speed. 

Here was this day with me two men to whom my Lord of 
Shrewsbury gave commission to seke out conjurers andmasse- 
mongers, who, as appeareth, hath done their endeavours very 
diligently. Many pretty books and pamphletts of conjuring 
they have shewed me this day, and to morrow they will bring 
the rest, with a good accompt of their travail in wryting, with 
a discovery of a pretty nest of papistes and conjurers. And thus 
I commit your Lordeship to Almighty God. From Grenewiche, 
the 12th of Feb. 1572. 

Your Lordship allwais at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I shewed her Majestie yesternight 
late, of these Scottishe newes, and of the request which Mr. 
Killegrew* maketh, whether he should deliver in wTyting 
the Queue's Majestie's opinion, touching the suspension of the 
pursuit of the King and the two Regent's t deaths. In 
both these she desired to communicate with your Lordship, 
and said as this day she dowted not your Lordship would be 
here, so that on Sonday she might resolve on all Scottishe 
matters, the which in my mynd were very necessary to be 
done. But if the Regent hath already lost Blacknes before 
he had it, and not happed the money neither, then I must 
nedes thynk it an unhappy and negligent mischance ; but yet 
me thynks they should be still beseiged, and not able long to 
holde oute. 

Here is also come more indicia of those conjurers, who be 
already taken, and a fowle knot of papisticall justices of 

* Who was at this time ambassador in Scotland, 
t Lenox and Murray. 



1573.] MASS-PRIESTS AND CONJURERS. 461 

peace discovered, and of massing priests. It were well done 
some were sent for out of hand, and others laid hand upon, if 
they could be found. When your Lordship is come, this may 
soon be done. Thus I take my leave of your Lordship . From 
Grenewiche, the 14th of Feb. 1572. 

Your Lordship's always at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

I send your Lordship herewith a letter drawn to the 
"two justices ofassise, according as my Lord of Canterbury* 
requires, but there is no more in the court but Mr. Treasurer 
and I. In th'examinations, I perceive there is a note of your 
Lordship's hand, and therefore whether you will send that or 
the copy I dowte, yet there is no great matter in that. I have 
caused a copy of the examinations to be taken to remain 
here. 

I can nothing like the justices of assise for mass matters ; 
they must needs help them to escape punishment, for that 
fault which they wold gladly commit themselves if they durst. 
But I may peradventure be deceived, yet that is the com- 
mon opinion that men hath on them. The haste which my 
Lord of Canterbury makes, causes me to send them to your 
Lordship, and pray you after your subscription to send this 
bearer to some other of the counsel now being in London, 
for their hands, and so to go farther to seek out the justices 
of assise, (if the matter must needs be committed to them,) 
and to deliver it them in hast. 

I showed the Queue's Majesty Kirkaldie'sf confession, and 

* The affair of the mass mongers and conjurers was turned over into 
the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury. 

t James Kirkaldy, who was taken at Blackness, on his return from 
France with money for those who held the Castle of Edinborough 
against the Regent. 



462 THE QUEEN'S ' PEACE-MAKERS.' [FEB. 

other occurrents out of Scotland, and shewed Mr. Killegrew's 
desyre, that the c peace makers ' might shortly be transported 
thither. "Who be they?" quoth her Majestic, u Mary," 
quoth I, " your Majestie's cannons ; they must do it and make 
finall conclusion." "I warrant you," quoth her Highnes, 
" and that shortly." " Then," quoth I, " I am glad, for it is 
better to prevent then be prevented. What some wold do, if 
they had leisure, your Majestic perceives by Kirkaldie's ex- 
amination." I trust your Lordship do not slack. The weather 
is faier and propice, and time runneth away. 

Mr. Holstock * hath written to my Lords of the counsell, 
and, as I perceyve by the bringer, to your Lordship to the 
same effect. I cannot see that my Lords are like to mete be- 
fore Saturday, and that which he requireth, the commission 
for triall of pirates, in my mynd either the Admiraltie 
or the Chanceiy, may do it without troubling my Lords. 
Thus I commit your Lordship to Allmighty God. From 
Grenewich, the 19th of Feb. 1572. 

Your Lordship's allwaise at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

I have sent your Lordship as much as appertayneth to the 
munition and things required for that castle, either in the 
counsell chest, or in my chamber. Mr. Sutton had two other 
remembrances of me for the wants of Berwick, to she we to 
your Lordshippe. It were pitie that good work should be 
staied. 

In sending back agayn th'examinations of the masse 
mongers, the letter which your Lordship signed was left 

* The Controller of the Navy, who had been sent out with some 
ships to scour the seas of pirates. 



1573.] IRELAND COLONY OF THE ARTS. 463 

behind, and so it was not in the packet. Wherefore I 
caused Mr. Tremayne to write anew to the same effect, 
and to be signed of so many as be here, and so I return it to 
your Lordship again to have your hand to it, and then to 
be sent immediately away. 

I received from my son these articles or communication 
betwixt my son and Sarleboy.* I pray your Lordship take 
pains to read them over, and to think upon them, against 
you come next to the court. I showed them her Majestic, and 
some she liked, some she liked not, as that article of religion, 
and she willed me in any ways to move her on it again, as 
soon as your Lordship came, before she went her progress, 
because (she said) your Lordship knew what hath passed 
heretofore in that matter. 

And I wold also know her Majestie's resolution betimes, 
for I wold not that my son should pass too far without sure 
warrant in such matters. And that (your Lordship knows) 
is forward enough. 

Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From 
Grenewich, the 20th of Feb. 1572. 

Your Lordship's always at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 

* Strype gives a tolerably detailed and connected account of Sir 
Thomas Smith's colony in the Arts, here alluded to, derived prince 
pally from these letters. The Arts is a tract of ground on the east- 
earn coast of Ulster, bordering upon the district of Clandeboy, which 
was then held by the Hebridian Scots under Sarleboy, the same who 
had treacherously slain the rebel Shane O'Neil. 

Sir Thomas obtained a patent for this territory in 1571, and associ- 
ated with himself his illegitimate son Thomas Smith, who went over 
with a party of adventurers to colonise it. A treaty was at this time 
in progress between the new colonists and their neighbours, the Scots, 
for the receiving Sarleboy and his people into the Queen's protection 
as naturalised subjects : but the success of the undertaking was hindered 
by the death of young Smith, who was intercepted and slain by one 
of the wild Irish, and after his father's death, a few years later, the co- 
lony was entirely neglected. 



464 AID SENT TO EDINBURGH. [FEB. 

I received after the wryting of this letter from your Lord- 
ship the letter that was forgot, and a warrant for three hundred 
pounds to be sealed with signet and privie scale, which shall 
be expedited with all speed. 

Your Lordship doth not forget a letter or warrant to the 
Lord President of the North, or some other, for men to go 
with the ordinance, or els it were not well to trust the Quene's 
ordinance with them, for all theyr hostages. Sir Edward 
Hastinges have bene divers tymes in hand with me, that if 
my Lord,* his brother, do send any men from his President- 
ship, that he might have the charge of conducting of them. 
Your Lordship knoweth his good will to serve. 

Because Kirrie is not here, therefore for the privie seale, I 
am fayne to send the privie seale first to hym to set his hand 
to it. 

My Lord Chamberlaynf is in the same mynd as your 
Lordship and I am, that these justices will rather cloke then 
open, excuse then accuse them who be worthy of accusation, 
and dowtefull whether they will hynder the discovery of the 
rest, that wold be broken, but yet I condescend to your Lord- 
ship's opinion, that their doings for this end may be tried. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Yesternight, if it please your Lordship, I came to the 
courte, and this day I heard Mr. Dr. Goade's sermon, which 
was good; but because that her Majestic was away, he said 
he was fayne to omit diverse thinges, which he most would 
have treated of, lest the speeche should have been uncon- 
sonant to the auditory. He seemes to me a very grave and 
considerate man. 

* The Earl of Huntingdon, Lord President of the North, 
t The Earl of Sussex. 



1573.] IRISH NKNVS. 405 

I have perused the examinations taken at London, as 
touching the fray betwixt Copston and Stace, where Co- 
pleston, or Copston, was slain, and drawn them into a sum, 
with the quotation of the testimonies, which I sent your 
Lordship this night by Mr. Trefrye. I think Mr. Dier shall 
bring them. I think th'enquest will find Copston guilty of 
his own death, and the other to have killed him unwillingly, 
and in his own defence, for to that end doth tend in a manner 
all th.e testimonies. 

My Lord of Worcester, we say here, is this night at the 
court, where the Quene's Majestic is. I am glad he is safely 
returned, and marvel that I have no letters out of France, 
but it is possible I may have to-morrow. 

These winds* that brought my Lord over, made me soon 
weary of Monthawer^ because I could not gref, nor trance 
plant any trees, that wind being the most enemy to all cut- 
ting, paring, or breaking of trees here in England, that can 
be, or setting of herbs. 

I have received this day letters from my son out of Ireland. 
Still he proceeds with his communication with Sarleboy to 
make those two nations all one, and, as it appears, the 
Scot is the more earnest, considering indeed that if the 
English and Scottish should strive together, when the one 
hath weakened the other, the wild Irish, like the Put Hawk, 
might drive them out, or carry away both. In mine opinion, 
the Quene's Majestic can lose nothing if Sarleboy be made 
d nizen, and homages to her Highness, with oath and yearly 
rent, to acknowledge the hold which he hath, to have it only 
of the Quene's Majestic' s gift, and so he to be a faithful sub- 
jest, or else to lose his right. 

The making of him denizen may be considered ; whether 
he and all his, in general words, or him and so many as be 

* North-east. 

t Monthaut, or Hill Hall, in Essex, the favourite residence of Sir 
Thomas Smith. It came to him by his wife. 

VOL. I. H H 



466 IRISH NEWS. [MARCH, 

particularly named ; and likewise the giving of the lands 
from the Quene's Majestic to hym above all, or to divers 
personnes named, or by particular meanes from me and 
my son. But if her Majestic be resolved ones of the ende, 
that is, to make hym denizen and as meer English, the 
maner how may the easlier be considered and directed. By 
that I can yet leame, neither Capt. Malby* nor Piers be 
restored to their bands, altho' your Lordship knoweth it 
was earnestly written that they should be. 

I trust the Quene's Majestic, if herHighnes will bestowe 
no foote or horsemen upon my son, will at the least this 
year suffer those bands to be there to countenance and sup- 
port that now begun aid and fort, and not leave it so naked 
as it hath been all this wynter, by cassing of those bands 
which heretofore was the defence of Knockfergus, and ther 
barr of the North. Certayne it is, that if my son had not 
releyved the Lord of Harvey's band at his own charge, 
Knockfergus had bene in great danger or els cleane lost. 
Because I know your Lordship should be very much busy now 
at herMajestie's being with you, I spake to Mr. Hatton, and 
now wry te to him agayn, when he see a conveuyent tyme, to 
move her Majestic for that matter of Sarleboy. Tyme goeth 
away, and messengers and letters comes not very fast to and 
from Ireland. Sommer cometh on, and therefore before 
wynter do go, the purpose and designe wold be forseene and 
provided for, wherby,in somer, his actions might be ordered. 
Thus I bid your Lordship most hartely farewell. 

From Grenewich, this Friday, 27th of February, 1572. 
Your Lordship's allwais at commandement, 

T. SMITH. 



THE BISHOP OF LONDON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 
Your Lordship's letters found me at Fulham. The into- 

* Governor of Lecale, near Smith's colony. 



1573.] A PARTY DISC'OVKUKJ) AT MASS. 467 

lerable business wherewith I was burdened at London made 
me fly hither, at requiescam pan-lulum, and that I may have 
leisure to pry into my book for four or five days. I learn 
that the Mayor of London hath fully advertised your Lordship 
touching our dealings with this Portugal, who of too much 
boldness and without any color of authority, hath suffered mass- 
mongers of lunge time in his house, to the great derogation 
of Godd's glory, the great offence of the godly and religious, 
and contrary to the laws of this realm. I, understanding 
of it, with my associate in commission, required theShirifof 
London, Mr. Pipe, to apprehend such as he should find there 
committing idolatry. Sundry he found there ready to worship 
the calfe ; only he apprehended four students at law, fresh 
men the most part of them, I suppose. These I committed 
to the Flete, until your further pleasure be known. Francys 
Gerald, the Portugal, offered to shot dogs, to smite with 
his dagger, and to kill, in his rage. There was found the altar 
prepared, the chalisse, and their bread god ; and in the house, 
as I hear, a great number of Englishmen hyd, as minded 
to hear mass. Because the Shenif had neither apprehended 
the Portugal, neither the mass priest, I gave commission 
to the Queue's messenger Norris, to apprehend them both, 
but the messenger returns to me, signifing that the Portin- 
gale is at the court to complain ; which to be true I under 
stand by your Lordship's letters. Truly, my Lord, such an exam 
ple is not to be suffered, God will be mightily angry with it, it 
is too offensive; if her Majesty should grant it or tolerate it, 
she can never answer God for it. God's cause must be care- 
fully considered of, maledictus queen facet opus Dei neyli- 
genter, queen contemnunt me erunt ignobiles. God will that 
his ministers purge the church of idolatry and superstitions ; 
to wink at it, is to be partaker of it. You that well serve God, 
to see that idolater and godless man sincerely punished, if 
you will let him over to me, and give me authority, I will 
hand him secundum rirliilcs. Your order I loke for, and 
that I will see executed so fair as my power will reach, upon 

H H 2 



468 SIEGE OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. [MARCH, 

the recept of the Quene's letter. Thus much I thought my 
duty to write. God preserve your Lordship, and direct all 
your doinges to his glorie. 

Scribled at Fulham, in hast, this March 2, 1572. 

Your servant at commandement, 

ED. LONDON. 



SIR HENRY KILLIGREW TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

May it please your Honor, the morrowe after Capt. Aving- 
ton came from the castle, I did participate his answer here 
inclosed, with the Regent's Grace, to see whether he would like 
of the conditions, and whereunto his Grace made me answer, 
that without the King had the castle in trusty and sure 
handes,there would be no secure peace, and that Lyddington's 
answer was but to delay time, and to breed jealousy, seeing 
he would not deale as th'other noblemen had done, but yield 
himself to another prince, wherewithall, for his owne parte, 
he could be content, but the nobility would never condescend 
to such manner of dealing. To be shorte, I cannot perceive 
by his Grace, nor any of his counsaile, that they will suffer 
Graunge to remayne with the keeping of the castle, and, as 
long as that holdeth out, there wil be always trouble and 
treason here among them. I cannot but mervayle what they 
meane in the castle, to continue so obstinate, unles God have 
blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, so far as they 
have no power to receive reasonable conditions, which they 
may have, and was offered them heretofore sithence my coming 
here, at our first conference at St. Johnston's, which 1 sent to 
Mr. Secretary long sithence. They in the castle had know- 
ledge (I knowenot by whatmeanes) that Verac was stayed in 



* Sir Henry Killigrew was now ambassador in Scotland. Lloyd, 
who has placed him amongst his worthies, has given us a high enco- 
mium of his character, his abilities, and his scholarship. 



1573.] SIEGE OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. 469 

England, and peradventure may be in hope that he wol be 
here to help them to make a better bargain for them, or else 
they look for aid out of France, whereof I can learn nothing 
here. 

I moved his Grace for some recompense in consideration 
of her Majestie's chardges, according to your Honor's mind 
sent me by Mr. Marshall of Berwick, whereunto his Grace an- 
answered that the King was so poor, that he had nothing to 
give her Majesty but the same conditions that was granted 
at her Majestie's sending to Leith, and to join with her 
Majesty in a good league, should be all that he thought could 
be done. And further to encourage the soldiers, they should 
have the spoil of all that was within the castle of gold, silver, 
or goods, that appertained to any man, except the King, or 
the value thereof in money. 

I stay my messenger for that his Grace will write himself 
to the Queen's Majesty, and to your Honour, and to my Lord 
of Leicester, touching that which hath passed, and also 
somewhat more. I have not yet the Duke's letters and the 
Erie of Huntleye's, but look for them daily. His Grace 
willed me to write unto your Honour, that the pledges and 
hostages might have the favour to lye with some noblemen 
or gentlemen for ease of their chardges, as with the Bishop of 
Durham, the Deane, and some other, wherein the more favour 
is shown them, the more shall they be bound unto her Ma- 
jesty and to your Honour. And if there be none in the 
Bishopric to take them, rather then they would lye at their 
own chardges, T think they would go farther into Yorkshire. 

The ships that were stayed with Verac be arrived this 
day, and new search and examinations to be taken of them 
by the Regent's Grace. 

The Regent would have no more sending to the castle 
until the army and munitions be ready to enter, and then to 
have it openly summoned by an officer of arms, according to 
the custom in such cases. 

His Grace hath an instrument that goes into the castle 



470 AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. [MARCH, 

and conveyeth Lyddington's letters. Uppon Saturday he 
shal be taken, and it is thought such letters upon him as 
they of the castle have written into France since Capten 
Avington was with them, who, at his leave-taking of them, 
seeing they would not deliver the howse unto the King, willed 
them to look for nothing but extremity. 

This much more unto your Honor, abiding my despatch, 
which shal be more ample, beseeching Almighty God to pre- 
serve your Honor in health and all yours. There never was 
so fayer weather seene in this country. 

My Lord Seton's eldest son is newly come home out of 
Flanders, and one Peter Douglas with him. They took ship- 
ping at Ostend the 25th of the last, and for newes sayeth 
the Duke of Alva lay himself at the siege of Harlem; that 
he prepared ten thousand men at Antwerp to be shipped in 
twenty great shippes, and one hundred victualers to go with 
them. I asked, whither ; and he said, to Flushing. I de- 
manded, how they did for victuals in Flanders, he answered 
our Englishmen brought much thither. This he told me this 
morning, before the Regent's Grace. Farther he told the 
Regent, that one Mr. John Hamilton had willed him to make 
his commendation of service unto his Grace, and he was at 
his commandment to do him what service he could, either 
with the Duke of Alva, or with the Queue of Scottes. His 
Grace asked whether he had intelligence from the Quene ; 
he said, yea. He further inquired whether he could speak 
with her, which he was not able to resolve; and this he did 
to prove the man. His Grace is in purpose to lay hands 
uppon my Lord Seton, and to put him in safe keeping, because 
he continually dealt with the castle. 

Stephen Wilson, that earned letters from th'Erle of Argile 
into France, is returned, and taken by the Regente's com- 
mandment. To-morrow he shall be examined. Mr. James 
Kircaldy hath hitherto confessed no more then I have al- 
ready written in my former letters. I have gotten his wife 
to speak with him, and given her instructions somewhat to 



1573.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 471 

enquire of him, assuring her that if he deal plainly and 
truly, I will be an earnest suitor to the Regent for him. 

In talk with his Grace of this peace, and the state of the 
country, after the castle shall be rendering into the King's 
hands, he yet confessed that as long as the Scottish Queen 
lived, there would be treason, troubles, and mischief. I 
answered he might help that, and he said that when all was 
done, he thought at this next parliament to be holden here, 
to prove the noblemen after this concord, to see what might 
be done. Whereunto I replied nothing for that time, but 
thought good to signify thus much unto your Honour by the 
way. 

From Edenbourgh, this 4th of March. 

The Regent is minded to proclaim a road upon the 
thieves at the time that our men shall be ready to come in, 
supposing it will make them afraid, and to keep good rule 
in the mean time. 

By your Honour's most bound, 

H. KYLLYGREW. 



WILLIAM HERLE TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

* A discontented man wold double his service and credit 
there, and content your Lordship in that he had found so 
just an instrument to decipher even their secret counsels and 
motions. For of a mean man, he saith, there was none 
more dere and familiar than he was, nor abler to enter 
into his bosom sooner, which he hopes to revive again, 
not only with him, but with other of great calling, whose 
humours he can entertain very well. 

Then, for our Englishmen there, he persuades that he may 

* This letter has the appearance of being imperfect at the beginning. 
Herle seems to be speaking of somebody in Flanders or Spain, who 
was to act as a spy on those who were plotting against Elizabeth. 



472 MARTIN FROBISHER. [MARCH, 

bothe understand and direct all their courses, wherin your 
Lordship shall adventure nothing either in credit or money 
by trusting of him over, but rather if he should be an ill 
man, to make a gayne by having him hence. And to con- 
clude, he saithj that he may, considering these tymes, and 
the dispositions of Spayne towards us, do good many wayes, 
but harme no ways, though he wolde ; desiring herin to be 
justified and accepted by th'effect only of his true and dili- 
gent service, which shall appeare to the Queene and your 
Lordship to be both sincere and faithfull. Whenmto I add 
humbly, in my opinion, that he appears a full reconciled man, 
and will performe more than he promiseth, for he hath a zeale 
to his countrey, and wold wyn his credit agayn by what 
hardnes or trial soever it were. And as there came good in- 
telligence thence of late by Brittain, so this man, if he prove 
juste, might exceede them all, be it either for sufficiencie or 
secresye. 

Lastly, I have to advertise your Lordship of a new con- 
spiracye, that is intended by certain decayed men, to go over 
into Spayne, and to joyiie with Stukely in his practises for 
the invading of Ireland, and the subversion of this state, as 
far as in them lyes. The matter is handled in Saint Liger's 
howse, and there concluded upon. The chief parties be Sir 
Warham Seint Liger hymself, and Jerem Brett, having al- 
lured to them Martin Furbisher, 41 with the promes of 20/. 
land by the year, or with the vallew of it in ready money 
to transport them over to their cosin Stukeley. They have 
joyned to them one Haselby, a seaman, and John Pools my 
friend, for whom I am most sorry, but I preferre loyalty to 
any friendship. They also intend to bring in some more de- 
cayed gentlemen, and some other suche as they note either 
discontented or addicted this waye, and among those they 

* The celebrated navigator, Martin Frobisher. He was born near 
Doncaster, in Yorkshire, and died of a wound received in an engage- 
ment at Brest haven in 1594. This letter gives some curious informa- 
tion on his private history. 



1573.] MARTIN FROBISHER. 473 

wold have young Browne with them, a base brother to the 
Lord Montacute.* 

Their pretence will be to ship corn over to Ireland, and 
therewith to pass into Spain, to which end if Jerome Brett 
have not been already to your Lordship to obtain a license 
for the said corn, he means to be. The occasion of this 
bile (besides their own decay andlewdnes) is an offence that 
some of them have conceived against your Lordship, namely, 
Sir Warham Sent Ledger, for the release of the Erie of Des- 
monte into his country again, which he takes in so ylle part, 
that he hopes to see the Quene's Majestic, he saith, de- 
stroyed, with all the pack of such villainous councellors as 
now govern, having opened to your Lordship great secrets, 
he saith, of the said Erie of Desmond, and of the state of 
Ireland, whereby he hath discredited himself unto your 
Honour, and is rejected withal from that he looked for, and 
should have had there, butt the Pope shall grow on their 
heals, ere either he advertise any more, or serve in such a 
state, where upstarts do command, and that the nobility of 
the land is kept back and contemned, cursing that blablipped 
cowardly fool, the Duke of Norfolk, that he had not gone 
roundly to his busynes, who might have had fiftene men to 
one of the Quene's, and yet wold suffer himself to be en- 
trapped like a dolt. Which words and matter, as they be 
grievous, so it may please your Lordship to construe them 
as you see wise, and to hold me discharged for imparting 
the same unto you; whereby your Lordship shall try the 
whole truth, with further circumstance, if you vouchsafe to 
speak with Furbisher's wife, whom I will send to you with 
a little servant of mine, by whom her husband may be made 
a mean to entertain this matter to its full rapenes. For 
they cannot depart before the next term, for that their 
bark will not be ready till then. 

* Arid therefore base son of Sir Anthony Brown, who was in such 
high favour with Henry VIII. Lord Montagu himself was a zealous 
Catholic, though a loyal subject, and as such esteemed by 



474 MARTIN FROBISHER. [MARCH, 

I have enjoyned great secresye to Furbisher's wife, who is 
the discoverer of this packe, and though it precede partly of 
displeasure borne to Sir Warhain Saint Liger, as I perceive, 
and partly of some jarre happened between Furbisher and 
her, by Sir Warham's meanes, yet there is great likelihood 
that every parte therof should be true, and by such displea- 
sures women many tymes have disclosed great treasons, 
wherin it may plese your Lordship to examine her of every 
parte that I have written, which she will shew you also 
written with her hand. 

Now in th'end these few words touching myself, beseching 
your Lordship to be good unto me, and to consyder of my 
hard estate, for neither have I countenance nor ability to lyve 
by any longer, nor hope remayning, but in the Queue's Ma- 
jesty alone, and in your Lordship. You know that I have not 
bene importunate since I was committed to the Tower,* 
which is now two years since and more, but rather modestly 
attending what shold be disposed of me, than craving what 
become me not. Notwithstanding her Majestic hath bene 
good unto me dyverse wayes, bestowing sums of money 
uppon me, wherwith partly the charges of my long imprison- 
ment in the Marshallsea and other debts were payd, and 
partly I have lyved by the rest. Also her Majestic bestowed 
a lease in reversion upon me, which I followed not. And 
lastly, having granted unto me, by your Lordship's good 
meane, the stallment of Richard Smith's detts, where I thought 
it shold have bene serviceable to her Majestie and profitable 
to myself, I perceive it cannot be performed in any of the 
parts, and thus I rest, by myne own unhappiness, an unhappy 
man still. But if it wold please her Majestie to bestowe upon 
me the reversion of Chamberlayne's office in the Tower, (which 
must be given to sornebodye,) I shold not only be well stayed 
thereby, but also enabled therin to obtayne a wydow that hath 

* He appears to have been committed to the Tower under pre- 
tended charges, for the purpose of acting as a spy on some state 
prisoners. 



1573.] HEULE THE SPY. 475 

a hundred pounds by the year, which wold greatly express 
her Majestie's graciousness towards me, as a preferment of her 
own, and make me able to serve her in some better degree, 
to the encouragement of other ; but without such a con 
tenance and stay first in one of my sort, nothing either pre- 
veils or is achieved, which I humbly commend to her Ma- 
jestie and your Lordship. Marry, I have neither fee farm 
nor ireholde to commend myself to the room, to make me 
the fitter for it, but only my faithful, humble, and diligent 
meaning, which shall make me the more bound in duty and 
obedience to deserve her Majestie's liberality in obtaining 
this, and therein do princes most show their greatness, in 
raising those that are under foot. At leastwise consider 
ing that the greater number of small offices in this land are 
employed upon those that have as little as I, and perhaps 
less good will, I humbly hope not to be excluded from the 
rest, and that my faith may have some place of beginning, as 
other that pretend to rise by virtue and service, which now 
is to be hoped for or never, being grown to gray hairs and 
to a staidness of life and manners, which altogether do very 
humbly entreat for me, wherewith I humbly take my leve, 
craving pardon for this my long letter, and praying to God 
for your Lordship's good health and continuance. From 
London, this 16th of March, 1572. 

Your Lordship's very humbly, 

W. HERLLE. 



THE BISHOP OF PETERBOROUGH* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My most humble commendations unto your Honour pre- 
missed, &c. My very good Lord, I most entirely, in the name 
of Christ Jesus, beseech you, (in whom under God and my 
Prince is my only tmste and staye,) vouchsafe among 

* Edmund Scambler, consecrated Bishop of Peterborough on the 
l(ith January, 1560, and removed to Norwich in 1584. 



476 THE PURITANS. [APRIL, 

your other cares of the state of this realme to looke upon these 
sheires of Northampton and Rutland committed in spirituall 
government unto me. And for because God hath blessed 
your counsailes and devises ever to the welthe of this realme, 
let it not greve you to ayde me with your counsailes for the 
better discharge of my office, and peace of the couiitrie. I 
am, without Godde's assistance and yours, very weake and 
unable to execute and dischardge the same in these troubles, 
iiowe moved and procured by those whom men do call pu- 
ritans and their fautors. 

They are growen apparently to neglecte, if they do not 
abhorre, the divine servise sette owte by public authoritie. 
So that in the towne of Overston, where Mr. Carleton 
dwelleth, there is no divyne service, upon most Sondayes 
and holidayes, according to the booke of common prayer, but 
insteade thereof two sermons be preached most commonlie 
by one Mr. Standen, and one Mr. Kinge, men for their opi- 
nions not licensed by me to preache at this daie. When 
theie are determined to receyve the communion, theie repaire 
to Whiston, where it is their joye to have manie owte of 
divers parishes, prmcipallie owte of Northampton towne, and 
Overston aforesaid, with other townes thereaboute, there to 
receive the sacramentes, with preachers and ministers to their 
owne liking, and contrarie to forme prescribed by the pub- 
lique order of the realme, which bredeth in myne opinion 
great scisme and division, with grudge and mallice amonge 
the people, so that I am doubtfull that further evill will en- 
sewe thereof. To their purposes they have drawen divers 
yonge ministers, to whom it is plausible to have absolute 
authoritie in their parrishes. In their waies they be verie 
bolde and stowte, like men that seeme not to be withoute 
great frendes. Whoso standeth agaynst them, theie seeke to 
moleste by some meanes, as latelie my Chancellor, whom by 
indytements verie much, and yet more by clamors and re- 
proches openlie in the face of the countrie, they disquieted, 
professing not to be satisfied by anie other meanes but by his 



1573.] THE PURITANS. 477 

departure out of the country, which no doubt of it would 
make well of their side, and for their purpose ; for if men by 
voices and clamours might be removed out of the way 
which withstand their unlawful doings, I doubt not but 
that theie will shortly have friends enough, and few to re- 
sect their attempts. I write not this to defend my Chan- 
cellor, if theie be able justelie before discreet and indifferent 
judges to find him culpable ; so that I would not have him to 
escape dew correction, according to the quantity and qua 
litie of his fault, but I wold be loathe to have him permitted 
and given over to their pleasures. And glad I wold be, that 
indifferent judges might have the hearing both of his adver- 
saries' offences and of his, before whom I trust he shall be 
found either in no fault at all, or ells in such fault only, as 
may well obtain forgiveness. if it be otherwise it shall not 
greve me, so that he suffer not more than he hath deserved. 
In this my Chancellor's case I have to crave some aid to 
bring it to the just trial of the wise, as in mine own 
causes aforesaid, I stand in great need of some direction 
from you, for seeing theie are increased and waxen bold, 
when I proceed, if I be destitute of a Chancellor, when some 
of them have offended, I am written unto by those whose- 
letters in mild words be unto me rather a commandment 
then a request. Therefore I beseech you, as before I have 
done, to relieve and help me with some part of your con 
sell. I would not thus trouble you, my good Lord, if this 
matter touched not as much the peace and quietness of the 
laietie, as it doth the regiment of the spirituality ; wherefore I 
beseech you pardon me, if in this anxiety and doubtfulness I 
fly unto you for advise. At Peterborowe, this 12th of April, 
1573, 

Your Honor's at commandment in the Lord Jesus, 

EDMUND PETRIBURG. 



478 THE CORN TRADE. [MAY, 

THE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Maye it please your Honor to be advertised, that this 
pamphlett inclosed was sett up at the Exchange, which I 
caused to be translated, and thought good to participate your 
Lordship thereof. The common report goeth, the present 
occasion of the scarcitie of butter, deare victuayles and 
grayne, is through the secret transporting the same beyond 
the seas.* The scarsitie of victuayles and grayne both in 
France and the Low Countrie considered, as also the civill 
dissensions at this tyme, whereby there is neither suche 
tyllage used, nor yet such farther provision of themselves to 
be had as heretofore they have made, will cause a further 
scarsitie and a high price of the same, which thing consi- 
dered, I fear me, unlesse your Honor and the rest of her 
Majestic' s most honorable counsell do the so redresse it in tyme, 
wil be an occasion to make a scarsitie among us through the 
greedy desyre of dyvers which by stealth doth transport the 
same out of sundrye crekes and havens out of this realme. 

And because it waxeth both skarse and deare about some 
of the coasts, there is some which cometh up higher into the 
lande to buy grayne, and as I am informed that about Roys- 
ton, malt hath rysen 3s. and more in a quarter, of late, and that 
chiefely by the Kentyshe men. Thus am I bould to trouble 
your Honor, as my dewtie requyreth, praying you to accept 
of my good will therm, as knoweth God, who long preserve 
you in his feare, with prosperous successe in honor. From 
my howse in London, this 10th of May, 1573. 

Your Honor's most humble to use at commandement at al 
times, 

LEONELL DCJCKETT, Mayor. 

* At this time France and Flanders were supplied hence with corn, 
beer, coals, and many other similar articles, and the call for them in 
those countries seems to have been so great that it was often found, 
or at least thought, necessary in England to restrain and sometimes 
forbid entirely, the exporting of them. 



1573.] SIEGE OF KOCHKL. 479 

DR. DALE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My good Lord, I trust your Lordship doth pardon my 
slackness in writing unto your Lordship. I heard not until 
now out of England since my coming hither, and hitherto it 
hath been but young days with me here. 

Their whole doings here doth depend upon Rochell,* of 
the which if they were rid of one way or other, they wold 
go about their own advancement, and let other men alone 
w^ith those matters. The Quene-mother herself saith they 
are out of hope to bring them to any composition, although 
they do all that they can to bring it thereunto, therefore 
they do appoint to give a general assault about this day. 

The town of Rochell is in a manner four square. The 
west side lies upon the sea, the south side lies upon salt 
marshes full of pitts to make salt, the north side is overflowen 
with thetyde at every full water, and the east side, which only 
is accessible, hath at the corner towards the south, an out 
bulwark called the bulwark of the port of the Cogne, and at 
the corner towards the north, one other mighty bulwark, St. 
Angely, which two bulwarks do flank all the curtain of the 
east side. 

Monsieur hath battered the bulwark St. Angely, but 
holds it not himself, and lies in the dych at the foot of a 
breach made into a curtain of the wall. They of the town 
are on the rampart, sometime at the half pike. What 
trenches or fosses be within is not known. There are divers 
gateways and platforms in the town, that do command the 
ramparts at the place of the breach. 

* The Protestants, who had established themselves in Rochel, after 
the massacres of the preceding year, and who had been ever since be- 
sieged by the Catholics, not only defended themselves obstinately, 
but from time to time sallied out of the town, and made destructive 
attacks on their enemies. The Duke of Anjou, who commanded the 
siege, left the place on being elected King of Poland, and the Protes- 
tants soon afterwards obtained a peace. 



480 SURRENDER OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. [.TUNE, 

Now the towne being thus, and their doings here being 
as I have expressed them in particular advertisements here- 
in inclosed, your Lordship will best consider the state of this 
contrey. And thus I do moste humblie take my leave of you. 
From Moret, the last of May, 1573. 

Your Lordship's to his small power, 

VALENTYNE DALE. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I thank you for the good news of 
Edynborough Castel, which I shewed straight to her High- 
nes to make her glad, as indede her Majestic was of it. 

For money, she said, that she signed yesterday to you a 
warrant of 3000/ for that matter. If it be so, the warrant 
which I have for it is void. 

As touching Monsieur de Lombre's sute for, as it were, a 
protection, Mr. Beale said he would speak more fully with 
your Lordship what is to be done in it, for to me it is some- 
what strange. The rest of his talke, as I perceive, is not of 
so great importance, but he may put it in wryting. 

My Lord Deputie's letter she hath differred till night, as 
well as the proclamation for the new books, &c. She sayd 
Tremayne cannot be dispatched yet this three days. I do not 
knowe the cause why, but if it be so, it is no great matter, if 
my Lord Deputie's man went before, but as he told me he had 
some busines to be done by the way, and therfore required to 
go before. 

What allowance Tremayne should have, or such messen- 
gers were wont to have, I know not. I pray you let me 
have your Lordship's advise. 

The Duke of Brunswicke's messenger is this day dispatched 
with the letter, and had a thirty pounds in reward. 

As yet her Majestic remayneth in one opinion for my Lord 



1573.] IRISH AND SCOTTISH NEWS. 481 

of Essex.* I trust it will continue, and his Lordship had 
need make much haste. The time draws away, and winds 
be changeable, and inynds. My Lord of Ormond had long 
and great talk with her Majestic yesternight, and so had some 
other body somewhat suspected for the same matter. 

Thus I commit your Lordship to Almighty God. From 
Grenewiche, the second of June, 1573. 

If your Lordship writing to my Lord Deputief could move 
and persuade him to fill again Malbie's men with the two 
horses diminished, you should greatly encourage Malbie, and, 
as I believe, verily do the Quene's Majestic very good service, 
though he had them but this year only. While the service 
is greene, and till the colours be on that side somewhat settled, 
what hurt the removing of them, at my son's first coming, 
your Lordship doth well understand. 

Your Lordship's always at commandment, 

T. SMITH. 



SIR H. KILLIGREW TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My duty most humbly remembered unto your Honour, may 
it please you to be advertised, that since the rendering of the 
Castle,! whereof you have heard, here hath been nothing 
worthy the writing, but of the death of Lydington, whereof 
my Lord General did advertise, who died not without sus- 

* Walter Earl of Essex, who was now preparing for his expedition 
into Ireland/against Brian Mac Phelim, who had burnt Knockfergus, 
and raised rebellion in Ulster. 

t Sir William Fits Williams was at this time Lord Deputy of 
Ireland. 

J Edinburgh Castle was taken on the 28th of May, after having 
held out against the English upwards of a month. Grange, his brother 
James Kirkaldy, and two others, were afterwards hanged by the Re- 
gent. Lethington was spared, but died immediately after at Leith. 
Killingrew, by his exertions, saved the life of Sir Robert Melvile. 

VOL. I. I I 



482 DELIVERY OF EDINGBURGH CASTLE. [jUNF, 

picion of poyson. Although for myne owne part I am able 
to say nothing therein, for I neyther did see nor speake with 
any of the prisoners since they came forth, because they were 
so odious, both to the Regent and to the people. 

As soone as the weather served, th'artillery and munitions 
were sent to Berwyk, which I trust be safely arrived there. 
The Regent sent a barke armed to w r atch them. 

I made searche for letters in the castle, and do send your 
Honor suche as are yet come to my hands. But for the 
Duke, his practyse, and our rebelles, with the French prac- 
tyses, I think Lydington caused them to be burned the night 
before they came forth. 

But in Grange's chambre sondry papers was founde, and 
lately the crowiie, sword, and sceptre, and hydden in a 
woodden chest in a cave, where the inventory was of the 
jewelles, which are many and riche, but the most parte in 
gage ; some with the Lord of Fernihurst, some with my Lady 
Hume, some with my Lady Lydington, and many with sondry 
other persons, who be all knowen. Whereof the Regent 
hath recovered some already, and shall do more. Grange 
had sondry delyvered him by one Mosman, before his coming 
out of the castle, which he put in his hose, as Mosman sayth, 
and declareth the parcelles which the Regent's Grace hath 
sent to the Generall, as also the note of such as be in the 
hands of the Ladye Hume and of Lydington, because they 
be in the Generalle's garde. 

The wynning of this castle hath bene a good meane to ex- 
ecute the act made for religion, for that many and some great 
personages have subscrybed, and almost few or none refuse, 
but suche as do lose their livings, if they be spirituall, and 
temporal men their offices, and be excommunicate. 

My Lord of Atholl is here present, and whether he shal be 
borne withal, or no, I know not. But I gesse the Regent will 
refer that matter to the Commissioners, which are appoynted 
for execution of the act. 

My Lord Duke sent me this inclosed of late bv Mr. James 



157-3.] AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. 483 

Hamilton, whose credit was that I wold deal for the resty 
tution of Pasleyand Arbroth, which I have done accordingly, 
and have this answer, that Arbroth shall be delivered by 
George Duglas into the Regent's hands, and Pasley. Th'erle 

of Argile is appointed Lieutenant, to perforce, in case 

my Lord Semple relent not, who has stood all the charges 
and the last open payne of treason. That being done, and 
her Majestie's advise sent to the Regent, touching my Lord 
of Huntley and the Duke's sons, I see nothing but a good 
and perfect peace in this country. 

Now, if it shall please her Majestic to do anything touch- 
ing the League, or to confirm the devotion of these men with 
some pensions,* before the French shall have time to prac- 

* The following extract of a letter from Killingrew to Burghley, 
dated March 14, of this year, will illustrate this passage about pen- 
sions. (MS. Cotton, Calig. c. iv. foal. 33.) 

" Touching the pensions, there be these men to be considered of; the 
Regent, th'Erles of Huntley and Argile, the Lord Boyd, who is able to 
keep Argile in tune and bears a great stroke in the west, Sir James 
Balfoure, and Alexander Hay. The sum to content them, and to 
keep them and this country at her Majestie's devotion is, after my 
calculation, 1200/. sterling by the year ; whereof 500/. for the Regent, 
200/. for Huntley, 2007. for Argyle, 100/. for the Lord Boyd, and 100 
for Adam Gordon, whom I forgot before ; the other 100/. between Sir 
James Balfoure and Sandy Hay, to wit, 100 marks sterling to Sir James, 
(who would in my poor judgement deserve the same,) and the 50 
marks to the other, who also will deserve no less. As for the Castilians, 
I can say nothing. If her Majestic will bestow but a 1000/. sterling, 
then Adam of Gordon, Sir James Balfour, and Hay, must be left out. 
I have felt my Lord of Argyle, who will accept 200/. of her Majestic, 
if it shall please her to bestow it, and yet I am sure he may have 2000 
crowns of France at this present, and Huntley, Idol, and others as 
much. Yea, I know the Regent himself hath been dealt with, even 
by my Lord Seton. But if her Majesty will take the time, and th'oc- 
cession, I am sure France shall fail of their purpose, contrary, miles 
they may see her Majestic constant, and to run a good course for her- 
self and her neighbours, I doubt me the Regent will not wade too 
far. What he may do for his part, he doth offer at this time. It 
lies therefore in her Majesty to make her choice, wherein I most 

I I 2 



484 DELIVERY OF EDINBURGH CASTLE. [JULY, 

tise with them. I beseech your Honor to lett me know her 
Highnes' pleasure, and to be a meane for my revocation, 
which now, being sent upon so short warning, as that I was 
not able to go to myne owiie house, but came from Woodstock 
hither, where I have remayned well near a year, and then 
crave the same most humbly at her Majestic' s hands. 

Archibald Douglas, of the Generalle's old acquayntance, 
was taken out of the Castle of Dombrytayne, and given the 
Generall at his request. There were found in the castle 300 

masse , which some call hosts, with masse-books, 

vestments, and such lyke. 

The Generall stayeth here to know her Majestic' s pleasure 
touching the usage of the prisoners, who still be so odious to 
the Regent, and the most and best persons, that if they be 
not executed, at least the chiefest of them, I, for my part, 
must thinke and say that it will greatly hynderher Majestie's 
service, and the great love she hath won in th'expugnation of 
this castle, which was but their den. 

My Lord Regent is even now going to Sterling, to my 
Lord of Angus's marriage, where I am bydden and do go 
with his Grace, and shall advertyse further by my next, 
having also at this tyme sent some advises to Mr. Secretary. 
God preserve you Honor. From Edenbourgh, this 18th of 
Juyne. 

By your good Lordship's most bounden, 

H. KYLLYGREW. 



THE EARL OF ESSEX TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

May it please your Lordship, yesterdaye I was at the 
courte, and dyd take my leave of her Majestic : she hath 
signed all my books, and I am departed from her Majestic 

humbly beseech the Lord God to assist her Majestic with his Holy 
Spirite, and to directe all your Honor's councells." 



1573.] ELIZABETH'S OPINION CONCERNING IRELAND. 485 

with very good words, and promise of her favour and further 
ance to this enterprise.* Upon the taking of my leave, she 
told me, that she had two special things to advise me of. 
The one was, that I should have consideration of the Irish 
there, which she thought had become her disobedient sub- 
jests rather because they have not been defended from the 
force of the Scots, then for any other cause. Her Majestic' s 
opinion was, that upon my coming they wold yield them- 
selves good subjects, and therefore wished them to be well used. 
To this, my Lord, I answered, that I determined to deal so 
with them, as I should find best for her service, when I 
come there. And for the present I could not say what is 
best to be done ; but this her Majestic should be sure of, 
that I would not imbrue my hands with more blood than the 
necessity of the cause requires. The other special matter 
was, that I should not seek too hastily to bring people that 
has been trained in another religion, from that which they 
have been brought up in. To this I answered, that for the 
present I thought it was best to learn them to know their 
alliegence to her Majestic, and to yield her their due obe- 
audience. And after they had learned that, they wold be daily 
brought to be of good religion. Much more speeches be- 
sides passed between her Majesty and me, which were of no 
great importance, and therefore I write them not to your 
Lordship. I did once or twice move your Lordship for my 
couseii Fetzgarrett's going over with me ; I think it will stand 
me in great stead. I beseech your Lordship to procure him 
her Majestie's license, and that with as much speed as your 
Lordship conveniently may. I am, my Lord, departed from 
the court with many good and fair promises of divers ; but 
of the performance of them I know not what assurance I 
may make. I repose my only trust upon your Lordship. 
Your honourable dealing with me both in this and at all 
times before, has been such as has bound me over to 

* His expedition to Ireland, which lie had undertaken partly at his 

own risk. 



486 ENGLISH TRADE WITH BARBERRY. [JULY, 

be at your Lordship's commandement. And so I rest, and 
humbly take my leave of your Lordship. 

From Duresme house, this 20th of Julie, 1573. 

At your Lordship's commandement, 

W. ESSEX. 



DR. WILSON* TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Maye it please your Honor, I have spoken with the Por- 
tu gale ambassador this morning, who is verie desirous of a 
speedie ende for intercourse and amitie.J And touching the 
article where Barbaric is to be left oute, and no mention to be 
made thereof, heliketh wel of that, and desireth it earnestlie, 
but on the other hand he would not have the prohibition to 
be for Guynee by name, but the general words to passe, of 
Conquestm Regis Portugallice, and so the prohibition to be 
general, without mention of Guinee or Barbaric. And yet he 
saith, that notwithstanding this general prohibition, his Kinge 
will never clayme to forbid any to trade to Barbaric. He 
desireth earnestlie to speake with your Honor, and sayth so 

* Thomas Wilson, LL.D. was a Lincolnshire man, and had been 
educated at King's College, Cambridge. He had been tutor in the 
University to two Dukes of Suffolk, Henry and Charles Brandon. He 
died in 1581. 

t Ever since the year 1552, the English merchants had carried on a 
lucrative trade for gold with the negroes of Guinea and likewise upon 
the Barbary coast, which caused some differences between the Eng- 
lish and Portuguese ; the latter, as first discoverers of those coasts, 
doing all they could by force and armes to hinder them, and by de- 
grees the two countries were in a state of mutual hostilities, without 
any declaration of war. Sebastian, King of Portugal, sent Gerard, 
his ambassador, in 1571, to procure a peace with the Queen, which at 
last was effected, and Dr. Wilson was employed in the negotiation. 
One of the articles demanded was that the Queen, to gratify the King 
of Portugal, should prohibit her subjects making any voyages to the 
seas and lands of the conquests of Portugal. 



1573.] ENGLISH TRADE WITH BARBERRY. 487 

well of your honourable dealings in this matter, as 1 was right 
glad to hear. I would not ask a copy of the same treaty, 
because I knew Mr. Benedict Spinola hath the same, which 
your Honour may have at commandment. 

I have read the French treatise,* but I have not seen the 
same in English, which if I might see, I would be right 
glad, the rather to answer their lewd railings. Buchan- 
anus (as I am informed) doth mind to answer the French 
book, which I do wish were seen in England, before it 
were published. Thus most humbly I do take my leave, 
wishing unto your Honour your health and harte's desire. 
The 20th of Julie, 1573. 

Your Honor's assured at commandment, 

THOMAS WILSON. 



DR. WILSON TO LORD BURGHLEY.f 

May it please your Honour, I received your letter at the 
mercers' feast, the contents whereof touches the trade to 
Barbaric. I did open to my Lord Mayor, Sir Rowland 
Heyworde, the governor, and to two others, who all agreed 
that the voyage to Barbaric is so necessary, as it were belter 
to be forbidden Portugal, and therefore they desired me to 
be an humble mean to your Honour, that no such accord 
should pass as to hinder them that voyage, because of their 
great vent they have for clothes and other merchandises, 
much apt for this nation's speedy utterance. 

I went, after this conference, to the Portugal ambassador, 
unto whom I did my message, and showed her Majestie's full 

* A libellous tract which had just been put forth in France, entitled 
A Discovery of Treason, reflecting severely upon Elizabeth's ministers. 
The Queen put out a proclamation against it. 

t Superscribed, " At the Court at Knowle deliver these." The 
Queen was on a progress in Surrey and Kent, a .detailed account of 
which is given in Nares' Life of Burghley. 



488 ENGLISH TRADE WITH BARBERRY. [jULV, 

resolution not to forbidde her subjects the trade unto Bar- 
baric, neither directlie nor yet indirectlie. He answered ac- 
cording to his old manner, that Barbaric should not be named 
at all. Unto whom I replied, that the worde conquestus did 
by implication and generalitie, make an universal prohibition. 
I told hym if he would desire to have Guinea forbydden, he 
might fynd her Majestic not unwilling to pleasure the King 
his master. But of this talke, he could not abyde to heare, 
ever iterating a general prohibition ; which I did as fast mis- 
lyke, as he did vehementlie urge. He notwithstanding, 
mayntayning styl his wrasteling, would not leave holde, but 
importuned this his desire most earnestlie, with promise that 
his Kinge should never lette ' our navy trade into Barbaric. 
And this assurance he made thereof, that like as his Kinge 
and auncestors did never send any armada to empeache this 
voyage, so would he never hereafter. I tolde hym that he 
had good advantage to deale agaynst England, when her 
Majestic shoulde passe her consent to the prohibition under 
her greate scale, and the Kinge onlie to promyse not to 
deale upon the worde of his ambassador. In conclusion, 
he told me he coulde not do otherwise, and gladlie he would 
be the author of a perpetuall peace, if it were possible, and so 
desiring to speak with her Majestic, I told hym that he might 
come to the courte, the fourth of August, wherof your Honor 
would sende unto hym advertisement. 

Touching the viperouse booke, I will sende the same to 
your Honor about th'ende of the weeke. 

And thus most humbly do I take my leave. From my 
howse, the 27th of Julie, 1573. 

Your Honor's most humble at commandement, 

THOMAS WILSON. 

1 Hinder. 

\ 



1573.] STATE OF THE NORTH COUNTRY. 489 

THE EARL OF HUNTINGDON TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My good Lord, I have most heartily to thank your Lord 
ship for your letters, and the occurrence which you sent me 
of the French affairs, whereof here were strange reports 
and dyvers, as men were affected. I am glad to hear your 
Lordship has some liberty to refresh yourself abroad. 
If, as is reported, that your Lordship comes to Stanford, I 
would I might conveniently see your Lordship there, as I 
have good will to do. If your Lordship come to see 
your house at Lyddyngton, the forest of Leefelde is not far 
of, where I trust your Lordship will take your pleasure 
as largely, as I have authority to grant, and shall best please 
yourself, and so I heartily pray your Lordship to do. If 
I had any better thing to offer, your Lordship should 
command it. 

For the state of these north parts, I thank God for it, I 
see no cause at present to certify your Lordship other than 
well of it. No ; that which has been so lately done at 
Edinburgh has set a good staye, and if it be followed in 
such sort as your Lordship knows is meet, with the be- 
stowing of some few pensions, etc., it will, I hope, in time, 
break the neck of all possible practyses, and so shall our 
good Sovereign many more years yet to come, by the grace 
of God, to the comfort of all her good subjects, and many 
good Christians., reign over us, and rule this realm in 
godly peace, as hitherto her Highness has done, which 
God grant, to whose merciful tuition I commit your Lord 
ship, and so for this time take my leave. York, this 5th 
of Julye, 1573. 

Your Lordshippe's assured to use. 

H. HUNTINGDON. 



490 CAPT. COCKBURNE'S JOURNEY TO SCOTLAND. [JULY, 

CAPTAIN COCKBURNE* TO MR. KILLIGREW. 

Sir, that morning I departed out of Irboyse, I disjoyned in 
Waltunne with your servantes, and after dinner came to Sir 
Walter Mildmay, who took well with me. On the morne 
at night I came to York, whereas the Lord President looked 
the date of my letters, thairefter sperit 2 my age, and mer- 
vayled. I departed from York at nine houres in the morning, 
and supt with the Deane of Durham, and lay that night in 
Newcastell. On the morne I came to Sir John Forrester, who 
tooke well with me, and treated me well, and made me good 
cheare. It appeared to me that he read not your letter, by 
reason he was playing at the tables. I came that night to 
Barwick. The Treasurer treated me well, and very well. On 
the morne I passed by Coldinghame, and lie was away. 
Thairefter to Coldinghame (?) ; he and his wife were both 
away. I came by Cherkington, and supped at Ormiston : the 
Lord and Lady have them commended to you. I delivered 
your tokens to her, &c. 

I finde his Grace and all that favours God and the King 
and Quene's Majestic of England wisheth you to be here 
agayne. The ministers longes for you, and have them all com- 
mended to you, and wisheth to see you soone here. You 
have hearde of Capten Robinson's good successe in his firste 
coming. There is good numbers to follow, and imbarked 
dayly, such as Capten Adamson, Capten Campbell, Cap- 
ten Ogibing, Capten Edmonston, Capten Montgomery. 
Robert Montgomery, servant to the Regent, passes directed 
from my Lord of Cathcart, the Master of Glamys, and many 
other young noblemen, to knowe the estate, and to returne 
with speede. In the meantyme all these good fellowes 
waytes on the winde, and dreames on Spanyearts and Vallonis 

* This is the person on whom George Buchanan,, in a former letter 
p. 428, was so facetious- 

1 Morrow. 2 Asked. 



1573.] SCOTTISH NEWS. 491 

with many others, Captens. The Lord Seaton is excom- 
municate, the Lord Sempill is here in court. The Erie of 
Argill marries th'Erle of Glencarne's daughter shortly. The 
Erie of Huntley's brother, Adam Gordon, is sailed to France ; 
the Papists hopes that he shall stir up some stimpe stamp, 
but the good Regent here is ever the longer the better loved. 
On the last day of Julye, John Drury preached in St. Giles' 
Church before the Regent ; he forgot not to recommend the 
folks he knew, and so like the King of France and the 
Queen his mother. Even now it is given me to understand 
that there is a little book set out of their innocence ; I 
have not scene it, if it be of effect I think it will be thought 
that the Regent and he hath done them great wrong. But it 
appears to me that my Lord Regent's Grace hath the better 
end of the staife, and you too. It is given me to understand 
that there is a young woman who hath a barn of late to the 
Lord of Grange, and that he hath yesterday written a love 
letter to her, and the bearer is taken. 

All this is deciphered. Therefore ye shall not be put to 
pains. August 1, 1573. 



SR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord. I moved the Queue's Majestic yes- 
ternight, as soon as I came to the court, touching the ad- 
vertisement of the Vidame. Her Majestic thinks, that 
neither it is possible nor likely for the French to attempt any 
thing now, they be so well occupied otherwise, and it were 
so unprofitable for themself now to provoke displeasure of 
their neighbours. I perceive her Highness is multum secure; 
yet she likes well the sending away of the man into France, 
and not much mislyketh the sending of some bark or pynness 
to discover. Her Majestic takes heavily the hurting of 



492 ATTACK ON HAWKINS THE NAVIGATOR. [JULY, 

Hawkyns,* and sent her own surgeons to hym, and Mr. 
Gorge to visile and comforte hym. It will sone appeare 
whether he can escape or no. Neither her Majestic, nor 
allmost any one here, can thynke otherwyse, but that there is 
some conspiracie for that murder, and that Burchet is not 
indeede mad. It is said here that divers tymes, within this 
fortnight, both by words and writings Mr. Haddonf hath 
bene admonished to take hede to hymself ; for his life was 
laide in waite for. Mr. Garret told me that he hath bene 
with one or two gentlemen that came out of the west countrey 
to London with Burchet, who declareth, that he had many 
phantasticall speeches and doings, wherby they might per- 
ceive that he was not well in his witts all the whole journey 
hitherwards.J 

I have sent your Lordship a letter of Sir Valentine 
Browne. I perceave all is there well and in quyet, but he 
writes me nothing of Hume or Faulx castles, whereof I marvell 

* A religious enthusiast, named Peter Birchet or Burchet, had 
stabbed the great navigator in the street, supposing him to be Sir 
Christopher Hatton. The Queen was so enraged, that she would have 
had him executed immediately by martial law, but the Earl of Sussex 
showed her that it was contrary to the laws of the country. When 
Birchet was committed to the Tower, he killed his keeper with a bil- 
let that lay in the prison. He was hanged. 

Sir John Hawkins was born at Plymouth, and had been bred to the 
sea from his childhood. He was one of the first Englishmen who 
traded to Guinea, and by his voyages laid the foundation of the slave- 
trade. He was appointed Treasurer of the Navy this year. 

t Sir Christopher Hatton, now the great favourite of Queen Eliza- 
beth, and after wards made Lord Chancellor. According to Fuller, he 
was born in Holdenby in Northamptonshire, and died in 1591. Naun- 
ton calls him " a meer vegetable of the court, that sprang up at night 
and sank again at noon." Burchet imagined that he and some others 
of the court were enemies to religion. 

The long and curious deposition of these gentlemen is preserved 
in MS. Lansdowne, No, 16, article 84. 

Who seems at this time to have been acting as ambassador in 
Scotland. 



1573.] ATTEMPT AGAINST DAY THE PRINTER. 493 

if Coborne have been there. Thus I commit your Lordship 
to Almighty God, the 15th of October, 1573. 

Your Lordship's at cornmandement, 

T. SMITH. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Sir, this morning came the warden of the printers, Har- 
rison, and brought me one other book in quyers, and told me 
that one Asplyn, a printer to Cartwrighte's book, was after ex- 
amination suffered again to go abroad, and taken into service 
into Mr. Daye's house, and purposed to ( kill him and his 
wife, &c., and being asked what he meant, he answered, "the 
spirit moved him," so that they be al taken and in prison, 
as he told me. Syns I sent to your Lordship this messenger, 
this he told me. 

I cannot yet learn that the book is new printed Syns 
Queen Mary's days, but I have set this Harrison and other 
a-worke to search out more. 

Thus God preserve your Honour. This 13th of November. 
Your Lordship's in Christ, 

MATTH. CANT. 



THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Right Honourable, the woman of Cananaea, thorough her 
much importunity, obtained for her daughter delivery from 
a troublesome spirit. The grief that grows towards me by 
a troublesome spirit, causes me to be a more importune suitor 
to your Lordship for my delivery from such a devilish 
spirit,* as my house is possessed withal. I pray your Lord 

* This ' devilish spirit' was the Bishop of Ross, who had been com- 
meted to the custody of the Bishop of Winchester. 



494 STATE OF FRANCE. [DEC. 

ship, therefore, helpe me, that this deVill were ridde out of 
my house. My trust is, that your Lordship will have me in 
remembrance, and I shall not fbrgett in my prayers to the 
Almighty, to beseche him hartily to defend and deliver you 
from the malicious practises of all your spiritish foes. At 
my howse, in the Chirk in Southwerk, 14th Nov. 

Your Lordship's ever to commande in Christ, 

ROB. WINTON. 



DR. DALE TO THE EARL OF SUSSEX. 

My good Lord, this contrey at this presente is wholly to 
settle anew. The King of Polonia * hath carried away all 
their mony that they can make, and many of their men of 
service, and some had away of purpose, as the Prince of 
Conde, and the Mareschall de Retz. 

The Quene-mother is not yet returned from her son of Po- 
lonia. The King hath bene sick, and is yet but very weake, 
and is gone to La Fere en Picardie, to take his pastyme. The 
councellers do attend their owne busines. The whole realme 
doth murmur to have an assemblie of the states. The Pro- 
testants are very busie aboute Avignon. The Pope desireth 
to have passage for 3000 men for the garrison of that towne ; 
the King will graunt him none hitherto. In Languedoc, 
Poictou, and Painctoinge, they do what they list, and who 
shall have the governement under the King, no man knoweth, 
neither is it knowne how the King of Polonia shall passe 
through Germany, yet surely there is provysion made in 
the contrey from place to place, for his conduct very ho- 
norably. 

The best thing the French have, is that they are in so 
good amitie with the Queue's Majestic, -and their neighbours 
busied otherwise, and therefore they do make the more ac- 

* The Duke of Anjou, who had been elected King of Poland. 



1573.] THE BISHOP OF ROSS. 495 

count of her Majestic. I do not trouble your Lordship with 
the particulars there, and other occurrents here, at this pre- 
sent, because Mr. Randolph doth return, who can declare 
unto your Lordship particularly what he hath found. And 
so I take my leave most humbly of your good Lordship. 
From Paris, the 8th of Decembre, 1573. 

Your Lordship's most humble, 

VALENTINE DALE. 



THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My duty unto your honourable Lordship premised, I am 
right heartily glad to understand of your Lordship's good re- 
covery and amendment, so do I in like manner wysh and pray 
for the perfectness of your health. I am advertised by the 
Busshop of Rosse,* that he hath prepared his things for the 
most part in readiness for to depart, and now chiefly stays 
upon your honourable order, being willing to take his journey, 
as I am no less desirous to be dischardged of him. Wher- 
fore I beseech your honourable Lordship's favour, as well for 
his speedy dispatch, as also that I may have the Queue's 
Majestie's warrant now for my dischardge in the delivery of 
him, as I had the same at his coming to me, about the which 
T would at this time have attended upon your Lordship my- 
self, as duty moves, but that I am so presently troubled 
with a murr, as I cannot come out of my chamber without 
great danger. And so, praying for your honourable Lordship 
always, I humbly take my leave. From my house in South 
work, the 15th day of December, 1573. 

Your honourable Lordship's humbly to recommend, 

ROB. WINTON. 

* Who was delivered out of prison, and sent out of the kingdom. 
He went to France, where he soon engaged himself as deeply as ever 
in political intrigues. 



496 THE EARL OF ESSEX IN IRELAND. [JAN. 



SIR FRANCIS KNOLLYS TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, fearing your Lordship's disquiet, I did 
forbeare yesterday to take my leave of your Lordship at rny 
coming from London. I would be right glad to see your 
Lordship here at the court in perfect helthe shortlye, and 
many good men that do honor and love you, would rejoyce 
therat also, and if there be any that wyshe the contrarie, you 
must forgyve them, but in no wyse to satisfye the humor of 
suche. 

Her Majestie hath lately sayde that in no wyse she will 
allowe my Lord of Essex * should be Deputie of Ireland, be- 
cause she wolde have no man that hathe land of inheritance 
there to be Deputie : and yet all men outwardly doth seem to 
favor my Lord of Essex and his enterprise. But surely I 
feare, if her Majestie woll neyther make hym Deputie, nor 
yet take the charge of that enterprise into her own handes, 
and so lett my Lord of Essex be but an adventurer according 
to his own offer in that behalfe, then I saye I feare that my 
Lord of Essex wol be undone, to her Majestie' s great dishonor 
and to her danger. 

Sir Henry Sydney, I heare, is labored to be made Deputie. 
God send hym temperance of diete, if he be allotted there- 
unto. 

Your Lordship doth remember that the last starr chamber 
daye, it pleased you and my Lord of Leicester, and the two 
Chief Justices, to be chosen arbitrers betweene Thomas 
Wynkfelde and Nicholas Daryngton, and now my Lord of 
Leycester doth offer to come any daye the nexte weke to your 
Lordship's howse, to heare and ende that matter, wherefore 
I beseeche your Lordship to appoynt the daye. In the mean 
tyme thys bearer is to showe or to leave with your Lordship 

* The Earl of Essex was son-in-law to Sir Francis Knollys, having 
married his daughter Lettice. 



1574.] THE BISHOP OF ELY. 497 

the writings for the entail, and also our statute, &c. 24th of 
January, 1573. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

F. KNOLLYS. 

Postscript. I perceive by Mr. Walsingham, that her Ma- 
jestie has now signed warrants for levying of 400 soldiers, 
and for 4000 pounds, to be sent to my Lord of Essex. 



THE BISHOP OF ELY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I trust it be not true, that your Lord 
ship should conceive of me that I am rich and have great 
heaps of money lying by me, for I count that state to be 
miserable and sinful, especially in this noddy and beggarly 
time, and also our fens, loots, dykes, and banks, 
being almost in all places so sore decayed. I meant not to 
trouble you with discoursing of my state, which partly I have 
done to my Lord of Canterbury, queen nuper erat in simile se- 
ductione. I am loathe to utter my bare condition, but I dare 
protest, coram domino in conscientia bone, that my sum is 
well under a thousand pounds, as I am able easily to de- 
clare. Ore oUoquentia Deus veritatis vindex obstruere 
dignetur. I wish rather an hundred others to take their 
pleasures, than your Lordship conceive any thing amiss of 
me, and otherwise then truly will bear ; and therefore I 
thought good to signify thus much unto your good Lordship, 
as to my dearest friend on earth. Dominus Jesus te nobis 
diutissime servet incolumem. From my house at Downham, 
the 28th day of April, 1574. 

Your Lordship's assured, 

RICHARD ELY. 



k K 



498 DESCRIPTION OF THE KING OF SCOTLAND. [JUNE, 



SIR H. KILLIGREW TO SIR FRANCIS WALSINGHAM. 

Since my laste unto you I have bene at Sterling to visit 
the King in her Majestie's name, and met by the way the 
Countess of Marr, coming to Edenbourghe, unto whom I 
did her Majestie's commendations. 

The King seemed to be very glad to heare from her Ma- 
jestie, and could use prety speeches, as how much he was 
bound unto her Majestie, yea, more than to his owne mother. 
And at my departure he prayed me to thank her Majestie for 
the good remembrance she had of him, and farther desired 
me to make his harty commendations unto her Majestie. 
His Grace is well growne, both in body and spirit, since I was 
last here. He speaketh the French tongue marvaillous well, 
and that which seemed strange to me, he was able extempore, 
which he did before me, to reade a chapitre of the Bible out 
of Latin into French, and out of French after into English, so 
well as few men could have added any thing to his transla- 
tion. His scholemasters, Mr. George Buchanan and Mr. 
Peter Yong, rare men, caused me to appoint the King what 
chapiter I would, and so did I, whereby I perceyved it was 
not studied for. They also made his Highnes dance before 
me, which he likewise did with a very good grace. 

A prince sure of great hope, if God send him life. I used 
as good complements as I could with the Master of Erskyn and 
his wife, the scholemasters and others declaring what care 
her Majestie had of the King's well doing, and how thankfull 
their dilligent service ; that their owne lyves were no dearer 
unto them then his Highnes' prosperity, and prayed God to 
lend him life, that he might shew himself thankfull for her 
Majestie's greate benefits bestowed upon his Grace. And this 
was all T did at Sterling, whence being returned to this 
towne, I found the Regent not yet come back from Dugles 
Dale, nor loked for yet these two or three days, and there- 



1574.] SIR ROBERT MELVIL. 499 

fore I have no farther to advertise then I did in my former 
letters. 

I cannot learn of any practise to transport the King into 
France ; but there is a sister of my Lord Levingston's about 
the King, much suspected to be French, and the King's 
scholemasters are desirous to have him from the handling of 
women, by whom he is guided and kept, saving when he goes 
to his book. 

Whilst I was there, iiewes came that th'Erle of Glyncarne's 
daughter, Countess of Argyle, was brought to bed of a dead 
son, and in great danger of her life. 

In my return from Sterling, I met with Robert Melvin, 
who desired me to yield his most humble thanks unto her 
Majestic for saving of his life. I see him so grateful and 
willing to do her Majestic service, as I think favour well be- 
stowed upon him, and therefore I pray you move her Ma- 
jestie's name for the full pardoning of Melvile, who is yetprison- 
ner in his own house, and under caution often thousand marks 
of this country, and hath no pardon, but may be executed as a 
contempned man to-morrow next. I find, as I said before, 
the man so willing to do her Majestic any manner of service 
he may, as I am the more earnest to press your honour by 
this few lines to remember him to her Majestic. I have also 
written to my Lord of Leicester, touching the Countess of 
Argyle's suit, which she desired might be delivered to her 
Majestic, by his Lordship's favourable means, and in my poor 
judgment, her Majestic shall do well to write her letter to the 
Regent's Grace in her favour and her husband's, who is a 
godly nobleman, and one that will be thankful to her Ma- 
jestic. This with the first occasion wold be remembered, and 
I withal commanded to follow the matter to an end. 

For occurrents 1 have learned none since my last, but the 
rest of the pirates that were taken at Montrose were brought 
this day to this town, and are shortly to be brought to trial 
of law. 

The Duke's two sons, my Lord John and my Lord 

K K 2 



500 VARIOUS NEWS. [.JULY, 

Claude, have written to welcome me into this country, and 
sent me a kinsman of theirs to sollicit some of their causes 
depending upon the pacifications at St. Johnstons which I 
shall accomplish. 

By a Scottishmaii come lately out of Poole, ' I understand 
that the King was very sickly, and so straytely watched as 
he could not possibly steale away, having not above thirty 
Frenchmen in all left with him. This man was with the 
King himself to make offer of the Scottishmen's service that 
since were slayne in Sweden, whom the King wold faine 
have retayned, but the Poles wold none of them. 

The Erie of Huntley is looked for to be here on Saturday 
next, with whom I shall then conferr, and wryte likewise 
unto the Duke and his sonnes of her Majesty's good favour 
towardes them in all their just causes, whereof they have 
already tasted. And thus abyding the Regent's coming, I take 
my leave for this tyme, committing your Honour to the Al- 
mightie. 

From Edinborough, the laste of June, 1574. 

By your Honour's assured to command, 

H. KYLLYGREW. 



DR. DALE TO SIR THOMAS SMITH AND SIR FRANCIS 
WALSINGHAM. 

It may please you to advertise the Quene's Majesty that 
Aigremond Radely 2 arrived of late atParis, and sent me a letter, 
that he had to speak with me for her Majestie's service. At 
his coming, he told me he had left the King of Spain's enter- 
tainment, and that both he and my Lord Morley are at utter 
defiance with Stukeley to that effect. 

He saith his coming into this country is to make his sute for 
the Quene's Majestie's grace, and he is sorry for his offence. 

Item, that the King of Spain doth seek to entertain as 

1 Poland. 2 Egremont Radclyff. 



1574.] THE DESIGNS OF THE SPANIARDS. 501 

many of the Quene's Majesty's subjects, as he may, to make 
an attempt against her Majesty. 

Item, that my Lord Morley and my Lord of Westmoreland 
and himself wold never consent to any such matter, and 
therefore they are not in credit with the King of Spain. 
Notwithstanding my Lord of Westmoreland hath an hundred 
crowns a month assigned unto him by the King of Spain. 

Item, that if my Lord of Westmoreland wold have given 
his consent, that there had been somewhat attempted at this 
time. 

Item, the King of Spaine's navy, which is in Biscay, is 
appointed towards Flanders, they in Galicia towards Ire- 
land, and the rest either towards England or Scotland. 
Howbeit, he said, they could not be ready before Sep- 
tember. 

Item, that Cotton is appointed to be Stukeley's Lieutenant 
for the voyage. He said he had to pass into Flanders to 
my Lord of Westmoreland, wherein I did dissuade him, but 
since I heard not from him, saving that he sent me word that 
he had received a letter from my Lord Morley that he must 
needs go to my Lord of Westmoreland. 

Upon the 4th of this present, the Quene-mother sent for me 
to speak with her, and at my coming, she said that she had 
word from Calais and Bologna, that the Quene's Majesty's 
navy was abroad, as they thought, to attempt somewhat 
against this realm, which she thought strange, being upon 
the sudden without any signification thereof before, since 
that she for her part hath been always so ready to entertain 
the amity with the Quene's Majesty; and therefore, she said, 
she sent for me to understand the truth. 

I answered, that I did understand of no such matter, and 
that I did suppose the Quene's Majesty's navy was not yet 
abroad : and as I learned, she was advertised so likewise by 
a man of M. de la Mothe's, which was then arrived, where- 
with she was well comforted, for she seemed to be much 
moved with this ncVvs. 



502 STATE OF FRANCE. [JULY, 

She declared unto me likewise, that the King was arrived 
at Vienna* the 25th of June, and that the Emperor went to 
mete him, and by this time she made her account, he should 
be at Venice. Indeed, there arrived a courier the night be- 
fore from the King, and it is published divers ways, that the 
King was come to Vienna at the coming of that post, and it 
is commonly reported, he came' away by stealth with nine 
horses, whereof three were Polonois, and was followed by 
the Polonois, but could not be overtaken. 

I have learned that immediately upon the death of the 
King, the Quene-mother despatched a post to the Turk, 
desiring him to assist the King of Polonia against the Polon- 
nois if they should stay him ; and also to stay the renewing 
of the peace with the Emperor, untill it might appear, whether 
the Emperor would give the King of Polonia passage. 

The King doth prepare for two ways from Venice, the one 
by the Orisons, the other by galleys to Ancona, and to pass 
over Italy to Ligorno, and from thence by galley to Mar- 
seilles. There is order given for the levying of two thousand 
Italians either to conduct the King through Italy, or to serve 
in Languedoc, wherein the Protestants at this time are very 
strong. 

Schomberg is gone into Germany with commission to spare 
no money to stay the roisters that are appointed for the 
Prince of Conde, if it may be. 

The Swissers that are levied for the King of Spain do march 
alredy towards the Low Countries. It is said that the Pro- 
testants upon the frontiers of Champagne have given an over- 
throwe to certain companies of the Duke of Guise. 

Item, that Monsieur de la Noue doth marche strongly to- 
wards the river of Loire, and hath given an overthrowe unto 
certain bands of horsemen in his way. 

Montgomery f was racked, to have gotten matter out of 

* On the death of Charles IX., May 30, 1574, the King of Poland 
became King of France, and was now on his return, 
t He had lately been taken prisoner by the Catholics. 



1574.] STATE OF FRANCE. 503 

him, whether the Quene's Majesty orM. le Due were privy to 
his enterprise, but he was very constant, as well therein, as in 
his religion, neither wold he by any means be induced to 
yield to any superstition, and was very much pitied. 

There hath been much talk of certain capitulations for the 
rendering of Quarantine, but it is not yet rendered as far as 
can be known. 

The Pope hath sent him that was last resident here to con- 
dole, who hath withal other secret matter to deal in ; it is 
doubted, least it be touching their league. 

There is one Godolphin that calls himself of the chamber 
of Monsieur, which begins to be a meddler, and saith he 
is one of them that are named to come in message to the 
Quene's Majesty, to have her Majesty's determination towards 
this country, and that Mauvissiere is one other that is 
named. 

There passed a post this way from Spain to Flanders within 
these two days, with letters that the fleet of the King of Spain 
is ready and doth tarry but the wind. 

There is a secret muttering that the King is staid at Vi- 
enna, partly at the suit of the Polonois, and partly of them 
of the Empire, for the restitution of Metz, and other towns 
imperial ; and certain it is, that he had no safe conduct of the 
Emperor. And thus I take my leave, with my due commen- 
dations. 

From Paris, the 7th of July, 1574. 

Yours, &c. 

VALENCE. DALE. 



SIR THOMAS SMITH TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, I thank your Lordship for your letters 
of the 16th, which I received yesternight very late, whose 
aclvyse in all points shall be followed as ne'er as they can 
be obtained The summary of the occurrents out of France 



504 THE EARL OF OXFORD. [JULY, 

is the arry ving of the King of Polonia at Vieime. The report 
adds that th'Emperor sent honorable companye to mete hym, 
and receive hym accordyngly. 

Egremond Rateclyf's talk I take to be of small moment or 
truthe, and the suspicion to be vayne that the French King 
should be deteyned in Vienna untyll he render Metz, Tul, 
and Verdun. He hath a pledge in France, th'Emperor's 
daughter, and two good solicitors, the Pope and the Turk, 
for his deliverance home. 

As for the navy,* I am of your Lordship's opinion that by 
delays and irresolution, we have good cause to feare that this 
yeare it shall do little good. In those two poynts it standeth 
at this houre. 

Of my Lord of Oxford,f for my part I can as yet learne 
no certayntie; but it is commonly said, that he arrived 
at Calais, and was there very honorably received and enter- 
teyned, and from thence he went into Flanders. As far as 
I can yet perceive, her Majestie's grief for hym, or towards 
hym, is somewhat mitigated. But I wyll do what I can 
convenyently to understand more of her Highnes' advertise- 
ments and mynd in this case. And so I most hartely commit 
your Lordship to Almighty God. 

From Richmond, the 13th of July, 1574. 

Your Lordship's allwais at commandement, 

T. SMITH. 

* Which was to have been sent out to attempt the Spanish fleet in 
its return from the West Indies. 

t Who, without leave of the Quene, or knowledge of his friends, 
upon some discontent, had withdrawn himself, to the particular 
trouble of the Lord Treasurer, his father-in-law, because it was said 
that he was gone to join the English refugees. 

V 



1574.] WALSINGHAM'S FOREBODINGS. 505 



SIR FRANCIS WALSINGHAM TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, what Mendoza brings is yet un 
known, but men of judgement think that the chief end of 
his coming is to entertain us with Spanish compliments, 
to lull us asleep for a time, until there secret practyses be 
grown to their new and full rapeness. 

Touching our sea preparations, we can neither resolve one 
way nor other : and yet there is done what may be to press 
her Majestic to resolution. These changes are both charge 
able and dishonourable, which has been laid before her 
Majestic both plainly and dewtifully, but nothing pre- 
vayleth. 

By th'Ambassador resident in France your Lordship 
knows the common occurrents. The messenger, who is his 
Secretary, tells me by mouth, that the parties you wrote 
of,* hearing that the navy stays, and that nothing is 
done in Germany to their favour and assistance, are much 
dismayed withal, whereon they builded much, and there- 
fore that hope removed, they think their case now despe- 
rate. 

If they quail, beside the dishonour, the danger that 
is like to light on us is evident. We seek neither to con- 
serve friends, nor to provide for withstanding our enemies. 

If this kind of government might carry continuance with- 
all, then should we have less cause to lament, but surely it 
is so loose, as in reason it cannot last. God be merciful 
unto us ! 

Touching my interest in Halyfeld, your Lordship shall 
understand, that sy thence my cousin Cox bought of 
my Lord Keeper his lease in reversion of the same, he 
hath been in hand with me for my interest, which I have 
denied to depart withal as yet, promising that if I shall 
depart withal, he shall have the refusal! thereof; which 

* The Protestants and the French Princes. 



506 DESIGNS OF SPAIN. [JULY, 

promise, if your Lordship can get my cosyn Cox to discharge 
me of, (whose interest in the lease in reversion were most con- 
venient for your Lordship also to buy), your Lordship shall 
dyspose therof at suche price as you yourself can desyre and 
thinke reasonable. After I shall understande that your Lord- 
ship hath compounded with my sayd cosyn, I wyll give my 
brother Dodyngton commission to deale with your Lordship 
in that behalf. And so leaving further to trouble your Lord- 
ship, I most humbly take my leave. &c. 
At Wyndsor, the 13th of Julye, 1574. 

Your Lordship's to commande, 

FRA. WALSYNGHAM. 



SIR WALTER MILDMAY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

I humblie thanke you, my very good Lord, that it pleased 
you to bestow so large a letter uppon me of your hand, and 
therby to let me understand how thyngs passe above, and 
specially the Bang of Spaine's sending to entertayne assured 
amyty with her Majestic, which I will hope is so meant. 
And yet there is no dowbte but her Majestie's experience is 
such, as she seeth that necessitie is the cause of these fair 
speeches at thys tyme, and therefore her Majestic doeth well 
to provide for the worst, for surely your Lordship knoweth 
better then I, that longer than you be jealouse of their doings, 
longer you cannot be sure from hurt from them. The stay of 
the shippes is a good stay to your cofers. I pray God it 
prove as well for her Majestie's service and sauffety. 

For the latter parte of your Lordship's letter, I do eftsones 
most hartelie thank you in that it pleased you to save me 
from so ill a jurney as I was nere. Surely, according to my 
most bounden dewty, I am and will be ready to serve her 
Majestic when and where she will command, but for my 
coming to London at thys tyme, your Lordship hath 



1574.] SPANISH NAVY AT SEA. 507 

answered sufficeable for her Majestie's service, and most 
freiidely for me. 

My coming home being so late, and the time of the year 
such as I am not the fittest to travayie in, therefore, my 
good Lord, I beseech you continue that mind towards my 
stay here, as you have begun : and I shall be bound to you 
for that, as I am already in many things, and be ready in 
that little I can do for you or any of yours, either here or in 
any other place : for so you have given me just cause, which 
I may never forget. 

Of my Lord of Oxford's return I am glad to hear. I trust 
this little journey will make him love home the better herafter. 
It were great pity he should not go strayt, there be so many 
good things in him, to serve God and his Prince. 

I pray God send to your Lordship, and all yours, even as 
I wish to mine own hart. And so praying to be com- 
mended to my good Lady, I end troubling your Lordship 
any further at this present. 

From Apthorp, the 27th of July, 1574. 

Your good Lordship's bounden to command, 

WA. MILDMAY. 

I hoped to have seen your Lordship here this summer, and 
so I trust I may do yet. 



THE EARL OF BEDFORD TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

My very good Lord, having this day advertisements from 
Plymouth, that intelligence is by a bark which yesterday 
arrived there brought, that the King of Spayne's navy is now 
ready to come to sea, staying only for a good wind, I thought 
good hereby to signify the same to your Lordship, referring 
the circumstance thereof to my letters herewith sent to your 
Lordship and the rest in that behalf. Coming hither into 
Cornwall, Sir John Arondell with others met me eight miles 



508 DEFENCE OF THE COASTS. [AUG. 

from Plymouth, and in all this journey have accompanied 
me, going first to Fow and thence to Falmouth ; and whereas 
your Lordship with the rest had given order to Sir John for 
the viewing of those two castles there, so he hath done. 
And I have in lyke manner bene there, and do fynd that the 
plateforme of that in Mr. Killegrew's charge, is much de- 
cayed and almost unserviceable. And albeyt to serve this 
present tyme, he hath caused the same to be amended, yet 
can it not continue the service requyred. Therefor, conside- 
ration were very necessarie to be had therm. Lykewyse I 
have bene to the mounte, and returning thence have assem- 
bled the justices of peace, and declared to them her Majes- 
tie's pleasure in all thinges, whom, as well for Sir John Aron- 
dell as the rest, I find readie and serviceable in all thinges. 
According to the contents of that letter sent from your Lord- 
ship and the rest, , I have sent two barkes to the sea 
to discerne this navie, but have heard nothyng of them. 
Other matter lykewise specified in that letter, I have given 
direction for, as appertayneth. Thus committing your Lord- 
ship to Godde's protection, I end. 

From Truroe, this thyrde of August, 1574. 

Your Lordship's assured, 

F. BEDFORD. 



THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO LORD BURGHLEY. 

Sir, I had rather you understood a truth by my reporte in 
suche matters wherin I am a doer, than by the uncertain 
speech of the courte. I have travailed muche by myself 
alone, for wante of other commissioners, to trie out a posses- 
sion,* which was verie earnestly believed and sett forth ; and 



* ( ' I know not whether it be worth the labour," saith Camden, 
to mention some small matters, as, the devout credulitie of certaine 



1574.] A GIRL POSSESSED. 509 

by print recorded and spread without licence. The two 
printers whereof, with others that sold those pamphlets, 
were committed to prison ; and if I had my will, I would 
commit some of the principal witnesses to prison to learn 
them hereafter not to abuse the Queue's Majestie's people so 
boldly, falsely, and impudently. After I had by diverse 
examinations tried out the falsehood, I required Sir Rowland 
Hayward and Mr. Recorder of the city to be assistant with 
me, who heard the wench examined and confessed and 
played her pranks before them. We had the father and the 
mother, by which mother this wench was counselled and 
supported, and yet wold she not confess anything. Whose 
stubbornnes we considering, sent her to close prison at West- 
minster-gate,* where she remains until her daughter and 
another maid of Lothburie, have openly done their penance 
at Paule's Cross, as it is ordered. I am so grieved with 
such dissemblers, that I cannot be quiet with myself. I do 
intende, because these books are so spread abroad and be- 
leaved, to set out a confutation of the same falsehood. The 
tragedy is so large, that I might spend much time to 
trouble your Honour withal. But briefly I have sent to your 
Lordship a copy of the vain book printed, and a copy of 
their confessions at length. And thus knowing your Lord 
ship is at the court, I thought good to send to you, wishing 
her Majestic and all you weighting upon her a prosperous re- 
turn.f 

From my hows at Lambeth, this Friday, the 13th of 
August. 

Your Lordship's loving friend, 

MATTHUE CANTUAR. 



ministers of London, deluded this year by a maid which counterfeited 
herself to be possessed by the devil/' &c. 

* In the Gatehouse. 

t The Queen made a progress to Bristol this year. 



510 STATE OF FRANCE. [SEPT. 



DR. DALE TO SIR THOMAS SMITH AND SIR FRANCIS 
WALSINGHAM. 

I advertised you by my last letters of the 2nd of this pre- 
sent of the entertainment of the King in Italy and Savoy, of 
his departure from Turin hitherwards, of the being of Mon- 
sieur d'Anville with the King, of the treaty for peace, with 
the articles of the same, (over sore for them of the religion, 
because the King will have the townes in his hande, and 
neither permit any exercise of religion, nor give any other 
assurance but his own wordes,) of the marching of the Swissers 
towards Noue, of the five hundred horsemen and four thou- 
sand footemen provided by the Duke of Savoy for the Kinge, 
of the miscontentment of the Marshal de Retz for forgoing of 
his office in the King's chamber, of the liberty that the 
young princes have to go about this town at their pleasure, 
and of the estate of other thinges in this court, which I sup- 
pose you shall receive before the receipt of these presents. 

Now it may please you to advertise the Queue's Majestic 
that since that tyme, I have bene with the Quene-mother, and 
have earnestly expostulated with her the late stay of our 
merchant's ships, and complained of certaine spoils that have 
bene done in the river Seine upon the Queue's Majestie's 
subjects, since the last release, which I obtained under the 
brode seal at Paris. I declared unto her also, how the 
sequel of the Queue's Majestie's doings, the demonstration of 
her Majestie's good-will by the late honorable funerals of the 
King, and all other her Majesty's actions, doth purge all those 
jealousies which have bene conceived without any cause or 
occasion, and what cause both her Majesty and her subjects 
have to mislike with those thinges, namely, since this court is 
so far from the sea-coast to give any redress. The Quene- 
mother answered, that she was desirous to redress any thing 
that was amiss, and denied that the last stay was made by 
her commandment, whereas she herself told me, that she had 
done it herself, and no less is expressed in the letters patents 



1574.] STATE OF FRANCE. 5.11 

of the release. She said she had been advertised from Mon- 
sieur de la Mouth, of the Quene's Majesty's good intention and 
honourable dealings, to the which her son wold use the 
like correspondence, who was to be here at Lyons by the 6th 
of this present. And withal she cast forth, that she had 
heard that the Queue's Majesty and the King of Spain were 
agreed; for it hath been advertised hither, that Mendoza 
had made up all for Spain. Et qiCil riy ajils de bonne mere 
en la cour cFAngleterre, queen no soit boti Espagnol. 

I said the doings of Mendoza were but for the intercourse 
of merchants, which is the easier to be accorded by reason of 
their evil treatings in France. I was in hand also for Sir 
Arthur Champenon's matter, wherein if any good may be 
done (whereof I have little hope) it must be at the coming of 
the King. I wold have learned how long the King was like 
to have tarried in this town, to the intent the Queue's Ma- 
jesty might thereafter appoint for sending to the King, either 
hither or to Rheims. But I could learn nothing otherwise 
then of some long abode of the King here, and that he doth 
look to do all these offices before he doth depart this town. 

Now further I have learned, that the Quene-mother hath 
a doubt of a league to be made between the Princes Pro 
testants, and hath had privy advertisement of D. Wire's in- 
structions, but all her hope is in celeritate, for she makes 
account to get Noue by the river of Roan, and also Possin 
upon the river, within this month ; and so by force or com- 
position to have all at commandment before any other stir; 
for they think to stay the doings of Monsieur de There with 
the Swissers. 

The King shall lack the Marshal de Retz about these 
things, if he determine not to use him. 

The worst thing that moves them, for anything that I do 
see, is, that they can make no reckoning of Spain, and all 
those sums of money which should come from the Venetians 
and other in Italy, are turned to good cheer ; sed omnia poniint 
in felicitate Regis. I cannot hear that they of the religion 



512 BISHOP OF ROSS IN FRANCE. [NOV. 

are anything dismayed for all this, for Montbran hath of very 
late taken Mur, a castle in Dauphiny of good strength, where 
the country had bestowed their victuals for their store, and 
Monsieur Montpensier's men have been beaten at Lusignan, 
et sic illi vicissim ponunt in mrtute, in quo si perseverent, 
necesse est bellum hoc trahi diutius. For the country of 
Dauphiny, where they do first begin, is taken to be very strong 
by situation. The Quene-mother appointeth to go towards 
the King to meet him seven or eight leagues in the way, the 
7th of this present. And thus I take my leave of you, with 
due commendations. From Lyons, the 5th of September, 
1574. Yours, &c. 

VALEN. DALE. 

It is reported by some that Thore doth mete the King at 
Chambery ; but the truth is not yet known. 



DR. DALE TO SIR FRANCIS WALSINGHAM. 

Sir, I cannot but write unto you, how much the penning 
of my Lord North's* instructions, which you made, is to be 
liked. I will assure you I never saw a thing better done in 
all my lyfe ; if it will please the Quene's Majesty to deal 
somewhat in dedes withall, it might work some good effect. 
I am much beholden unto you for your furtherance in my 
allowance, and I pray you per amicitiam tuam to be careful 
of me therin. I do begin to run deeply on the score already. 
I thank you very much for your advertisement touching our 
good Bishop here. I will be as ware of him as possibly I 
may ; and so had men nede to be in all places. He hath pre- 
sented a book to this King, with pestilent persuasions to take 
upon him the protection of the Scottish Quene, which book 
when you see agnosces facile veteratorem. My Lord North 
bringeth a copy with hym of it, who hath so charmed the 

* Lord North was sent ambassador into France to congratulate the 
accession of the new King. 



1574.] SIR PHILIP SYDNEY. 513 

Bishop since he came hither, that if he had care of his mis- 
tress' well doing, he wold forbear to danger both her and her 
cause, but he cannot but be like himself. At the latter end 
of our action, which we suppose will be within these two 
days, we shall be able to advertise you more perfectly of all 
things. In the meantime, I take my leave of you, with very 
great thanks. From Lyons, the 3rd of November, J574. 

Yours, &c. VALENCE. DALE. 



SIR PHILIP SYDNEY TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER. 

Right honourable and my singular good Lord and uncle, 
although I have at this present little matter worthy the 
writing unto your Lordeshippe, yet being newly returned 
from my Polish journey, I would not omit any occasion of 
humbly performing this duty ; wherefore I humbly beseech 
your Lordeshippe to take these few lines in good part 
which I write rather to continue that I owe unto you, 
then for any other thing they may contain in them. The 
Emperor, as I wrote last unto your Lordeshippe, has these 
two years continually pretended a journey to Prig, which, 
it is thought shall indeed be performed, to the great con- 
tentation of that kingdom, which otherwise seems to bend 
to disobedience. There it is thought his son shall very 
shortly be King, whom likewise the Emperor seeks by all 
means possible to advance to the kingdom of the Ro- 
mains, and for that purpose desires to call an imperial 
Diet in Frankfurt, the place appointed for the elections ; but 
it is thought the electors will rather chose another for this 
next ensuing Diet, which is said shall be the summer follow 
ing at the furthest, and then there is no hope of election. Not 
being at Frankfurt, it is likely it shall be at Regenspurg, 
where I believe theEmperour will demand far greater sums 
of money then will be granted unto him. 

Though the peace betwixtethe Turk and him is not as yet, as 
far as it is known, perfectly concluded, yet it is thought the 

VOL. I. L L 



514 FOREIGN NEWS. [NOV. 1574. 

Turk will rather precede by sea then this way. And as 
the French e ambassador has written, meaning to visit the 
Pope's territory, perchance his conscience moves him to 
seek the benefit of the jubilee. I hope, as the Spaniards 
already begin to speak lower, so the Pope's holiness will 
have less leisure to miriistre such wicked and detestable 
counceills to the Christian princes as hitherto he doth. Out of 
France your Lordeshippe has the advertisements from the 
ambassador ; the Prince of Condo is retired to Basil, where he 
lives in company with the admiral's children, being frustrate 
of a great e hope he had conceived of succour out of Germany, 
wherein many and wise men do impute great fault to the 
Prince Casimire, the Count Palatine's second son, in so much 
that to write to your Lordship plainly, he is heavily suspected 
to be corrupted by the French. His father certainly is as for 
tuous a prince as lives ; but he suffers himself too much to 
be governed by that son. This I thought my duty to write, as 
having heard it in very good place, and much affectioned to 
the true cawse. The Polakes heartily repent their so far- 
fetched election, being now in such case neither they have 
the King, nor anything the King with so many others 
had promised, besides that there is lately stirred up a very 
dangerous sedition, for the same cause that has bred 
such lamentable ruins in France and Flandres. Now there 
it is reasonably well appeased, but it is thought it will re- 
maine so but a while. 

I have no other thing worthy the writing at this present 
to your Lordeshippe, wherefore I humbly cease, with my daily 
and most boundne prayer, that it may please the Eternal to 
continue and increase you in all prosperity. 

From Vienne, this 27th of November, 1574. 

Your Lordship's most deutifull, 

PHILIPPE SIDNEY